---
---

This edited transcript is the product of videotaped interviews conducted
by

Charles Hardy with Will Anderson in Portland, Oregon,

on September 30 and October 1, 2004,for the non-profit group Recording
Animal Advocacy

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 – September 30, 2004

\[Disk 1\] . . . . .

1

Attended school and college in Illinois and Washington; joined US Air
Force in 1967 – Experience in Air Force as survival instructor: became a
vegetarian soon after having to kill a rabbit as part of survival
training course; after three years, filed for conscientious objector to
war status but ran into legal difficulties because the Air Force was not
familiar with administrative process; was eventually given honorable
discharge in 1970 – Involved in antiwar protests and attended Spokane
Community College – Journey overland from Europe to India and return
over the course of one year, was a life and world-view altering
experience – Joined the Peace Corps and went to Sierra Leone, Africa,
for several months to introduce new varieties of rice and methods of
rice growing, but felt he was not helping the poorest in the village and
that political influence overshadowed effort; felt ineffective –
Attended Western Washington University (a state college at the time) for
one semester but disagreed with views of some professors that
manipulation and more technology were the simple answer to world
problems – Involvement with Greenpeace in Vancouver, BC, Canada, was the
beginning of career in environmental activism; inspired by public
response to glorious send-off of the vessel “Phyllis Cormac” to save the
whales – Has had a sensitivity to animals being hurt since childhood –
Trips to Baja, Mexico while living in Alaska for seven years: camping
out on the barrier island of whale calving lagoon for weeks and months
in order to be with the whales; descriptions and reflections on
experience in Baja; also did recording and photography of whales;
meeting the jazz musicians of the Paul Winter Consort who played music
there on a platform; involvement with fighting phosphate rock mining
project – Becoming a national board member of Greenpeace and founding
Greenpeace Alaska in 1978 happened because of initiative and fortunate
time and place circumstances.

\[Disk 2\] . . . . .

16

Greenpeace Alaska: offshore oil exploration’s impacts on wildlife
(especially whales and seals) was main initial campaign; working with
Native American communities on oil and whale habitat issues; campaigned
against aerial (shooting from airplanes) wolf hunting, use of
herbicides; no mentors; board members and skilled support were all
volunteers; successful in media outreach but failed to stop aerial hunt
– Development of national Greenpeace in its earlier years of phenomenal
growth overwhelmed abilities to manage professionally with grassroots
resources; key campaigns were whaling and sealing – Left Greenpeace and
eventually Alaska; was able to get back surgery only after quitting
non-insured Greenpeace job – Felt drawn to Hawaii; worked on catamaran
as deckhand then first mate; taught snorkeling and gave whale watch
narrations; description of episode when catamaran hit a coral reef
during a gale and large waves – Helped prepare and went with Greenpeace
vessel “Rainbow Warrior” but chose to protest solo in Newfoundland;
taken into protective custody by Royal Canadian Mounted Police for
safety; reflections on this experience and reasons for protesters to
take direct action – Assisted a Greenpeace media representative while in
Canada at Price Edward Island – Experience of being one of the activists
who chained themselves to a vessel that dumped titanium dioxide waste
off the coast of New Jersey – Started Greenpeace merchandise store in
Provincetown, Massachusetts – Images of talking to Native Americans
about their opinions on offshore drilling in the Arctic in their mobile
homes and seeing whale meat in the village – More on chaining to the
dumping vessel – Started the “Ecology House” stores and franchises with
a partner – Co-founded the Maine Animal Coalition with several other
activists; activism in Maine included videotaping egg-layer factory farm
and reforming oxen-pulling contests – Worked for the Progressive Animal
Welfare Society (PAWS) in state of Washington after Ecology House was
sold (and some stores closed) in 1991 due to country’s economic
recession; campaigns at PAWS included sea lions and steelhead salmon
interactions, Muslim slaughter practices, livestock auctions, greyhound
racing, legislative lobbying, puppy farms, Omak Suicide Race and more.

\[Disk 3\] . . . . .

33

Very important for media to present issues objectively and completely so
all sides can understand each other – Makah whaling issue: got “very
enmeshed” in this campaign because gray whales were the ones he studied
and lived with for months in Baja; the importance of being factual and
respectful; helping anti-whaling Makah elder get her message out;
although understand the views of pro-whaling elders (that it is their
culture and identity), “there are fundamental unifying principles that
have to be accepted regardless of culture” – Forced out at PAWS after
eight years and after taking on Department Director role because of
mistakes in hiring and being absent, failing to manage while in field
during Makah whaling campaign – Narrative of an incident of videotaping
the Omak Suicide (horse) Race in Washington state: assaulted by
Sheriff’s deputies and civilians who tried to destroy videotape and
photos of horse killed by the race; arrested and jailed overnight
because deputies filed false statements; WA sued all those involved with
the race and Sheriff’s office because of the evidence salvaged from the
video/audio tape and eventually awarded a sizeable amount of money by
the court arbitrator – Worked for Earth Island Institute on the
endangered Southern Resident Orca whales of Puget Sound out of his
Seattle home office – Reflections on past efforts and hopes for the
future; the need for consensus in the environmental and animal
protection communities – The experience of undergoing treatment for
prostate cancer.

Session 2 – October 1, 2004

\[Disk 4\] . . . . .

44

The importance and power of personal choices and responsibility,
especially in one’s diet – Animal-related themes and kinds of
merchandise in Ecology House stores – Going into and videotaping an egg
farm in Maine; horrible conditions of the places and for the chickens;
shared videotapes with other animal protection groups – Photographed
horses being transported and flown to Japan for slaughter/meat –
Interacting occasionally with People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals (PETA) – Thoughts and views on various topics, including the
difficulty in changing tradition, culture and habit, the current
difference between environmentalist and animal welfarist, the important
connection between diet and environmental protection – Interests in
various social justice causes; recognizing and living publicly as a gay
person – Peter Singer’s book Animal Liberation has helped in
understanding the “big picture”; year-long trip to Europe and Asia has
had a significant on WA’s personal perspective; thoughts on spirituality
– Participation in and observations on the 1999 protests against the
World Trade Organization in Seattle – Really important for everyone to
realize the need to change unsustainable ways and human ecology around
the world – Views on destruction of physical property and using shock
tactics; importance of activists having a strategic plan ready in order
to achieve goals; animal and environmental activists are actually
fighting “radicalism, radical behavior by institutions and norms that
are out of control, by consumption with no end, by self-destruction.”

Index . . . . .

57

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

September 30, 2004

Portland, Oregon – Oral History Association annual conference in the
Hilton Hotel

Session of 2-1/4 hour

October 1, 2004

Portland, Oregon – Oral History Association annual conference in the
Hilton Hotel

Session of 1 hour

Interviewer:

Charles Hardy (Professor, Department of History, West Chester
University; oral historian)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Will Anderson. Lee checked the edited
transcript added footnotes, prepared the index and introductory material
except the “Biographical sketch” which was provided by Anderson.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Will Anderson was blessed to have two loving parents who gave their all
while raising him and his sister in the Midwest. He was born in Chicago,
IL, on May 26, 1948. Will and his family remained in the city for
several years before moving to the suburb of Hoffman Estates to the
northwest. Will has always had a love of walking and exploring. It is
perhaps his walking adventures to Chicago’s Lincoln Park, its lagoon and
the adjacent shoreline of Lake Michigan that gave him his appreciation
of the outdoors and other, nonhuman life – even while living in the
city. He often took the bus to the Museum of Natural History, a favorite
place of wonder. Though living in the suburbs until finishing high
school, Will’s home was set in the midst of vast cornfields, wetlands
and open spaces. Some time during these early years, Will developed a
deep and abiding sense of empathy for all.

In 1966, Will moved with his family to the Seattle area. After a
semester at Eastern Illinois University, will enrolled in the US Air
Force and chose to become a survival instructor based at Spokane,
Washington. After three years, Will declared himself to be a
conscientious objector, was put under barrack’s arrest and underwent a
fractured process before favorable findings resulted in his discharge.

After the Air Force, Will completed an A.A. degree at Spokane Community
College. He then took a year-long journey to Europe and overland to
India. This trip affected him deeply and created the lens and world view
perspective that remains to this day. The cultures and raw experiences
of traveling slowly through these countries circa 1970 fed his sense of
the mystical tempered with the immediacy of the material.

The next several years involved a return to school at Western Washington
University for a short time (Human Ecology), a move to Alaska where he
founded Greenpeace Alaska, was Director of the Alaska region (becoming a
board member of Greenpeace USA), worked on the Alaska pipeline. At this
time he began his lengthy trips to be with the gray whales in Baja,
Mexico. After nearly seven years in Alaska (often seasonally), Will
moved to Hawaii where he worked on a commercial catamaran that took
tourists snorkeling and whale watching. Eventually he moved to Boston,
again working for Greenpeace in many capacities.

With a partner, Will opened the first of several environmentally-themed
gift stores called Ecology House. The first was in Lahaina, Hawaii
(second time living there), then Provincetown, MA and again in Portland,
ME when they began selling franchises to open stores in other cities.
While in Maine, Will co-founded the Maine Animal Coalition. Will’s
involvement in Ecology House ended in 1991. While in Portland, OR, Will
completed his degree getting a B.Sc. in Business Management and
Communication. From Portland, OR, Will moved to Seattle where for seven
years he worked for the Progressive Animal Welfare Society (PAWS) in
Lynnwood, WA.

After PAWS, Will has worked as a real estate agent and director of the
Orca Recovery Campaign, a project of Earth Island’s Marine Mammal
Project (ww.saveorcawhales.org). He remains privately involved in
several issues and has intent in returning to the animal welfare and
environmental movement full time.

Will’s current interests lie in helping unify the baseline beliefs of
the environmental and animal welfare communities. The subject matter of
his environmental and animal welfare work includes: offshore oil
industry impacts on marine mammals; Alaska aerial wolf hunt; Pribilof
fur seal hunt; squid drift net fishery; Mt. goat hunt in Olympic
National Park; environmental impact DEIS/EIS processes; Tribal
subsistence and take issues; the Makah gray whale hunt; religious ritual
slaughter; Omak Suicide Race; slaughterhouse auctions; commercial egg
production; leghold traps; animal abuse investigations; harp seal hunt;
invasive laboratory experimentation; roadside animal shows, marine
mammal captivity, rodeos and more.

Other background experiences include recording and publishing humpback
whale songs and informally studying gray whales under Mexico Federal
government permit.

\[The above biography was provided by Will Anderson, February 27,
2005.\]

Will Anderson

Session \#1

September 30, 2004

Portland, Oregon

Charles Hardy, Interviewer

Carmen Lee, Observer

\[Begin Disk 1 of 4\]

Hardy: Let’s start. What’s today’s date, Carmen? Is today the last day
of — it is. It’s September 30th, 2004, and this is an interview with
Will Anderson. We are in Portland, Oregon. This is for the Recording
Animal Advocacy project. Let’s start.

What we like to do with oral history is make as autobiographical as
possible, and we like to start at the beginning and work our way
forward. Where were you born?

Anderson: Chicago XE "Illinois:Chicago" , fifty-six years ago.

Hardy: I was close on the age. \[Laughter\]. Where did you grow up?

Anderson: Chicago XE "Illinois:Chicago" and then the suburbs. When I was
about eighteen or so I moved with my parents out west, went back to
Illinois to go to school. That lasted a short time and I went back to
Washington XE "Washington" state and worked in various things. \[I\] was
afraid of being inducted into the army during the Vietnam XE "Vietnam
War" War. I was called in for my physical and that enough was to
convince me I wanted some control of my life, and so I enlisted in the
air force XE "U.S. Air Force" .

Hardy: What kind of family?

Anderson: Small nuclear. Father was policeman. Mother was a housemaker.
She did have some part-time jobs. I had one sister. It was a fairly
normal life.

Hardy: Where did you go to high school?

Anderson: In Illinois XE "Illinois" . It was Conant High School, and
then there was something called Fremd, if you can imagine that — Conant
being named after an educator. Fremd was an experiment, a new school
without windows in the classroom, but with brightly painted walls
inside. Perhaps that’s been more of an influence on me than I imagined.

Hardy: Were you going to college when you graduated from high school?

Anderson: Yes, I did. I went for half a semester. Then I continued going
to school on and off throughout the years until I got my degree.

Hardy: What school?

Anderson: I went to Northern Illinois University XE "Northern Illinois
University" , Spokane Community College XE "Spokane Community College" ,
Western Washington XE "Western Washington University" now University —
it was a state college then — and then I went to Concordia XE "Concordia
College" here in Portland XE "Oregon:Portland" and got a bachelor of
science in business management and communication.

Hardy: But you didn’t stay in college to avoid the draft, it sounds
like.

Anderson: No.

Hardy: What year did you go in?

Anderson: It was 1967. I didn’t go into college to avoid the draft. I
didn’t have the money and, at the time, I had just left Illinois XE
"Illinois" . Just this state of events, I felt my number was coming up.

Hardy: What was your number?

Anderson: I don’t recall having a number, just that having a medical
exam ordered was enough to convince me.

Hardy: But you were before the lottery came along XE "military service"
\\r "mil1" .

Anderson: Yes, just before the lottery. But I had my physical in Seattle
XE "Washington:Seattle" , and they put us in the barracks overnight. I
knew then that the army wasn’t my place to be. I was told the air force
XE "U.S. Air Force" had more of a civil service atmosphere in some
respects. I ended up joining a segment of the air force XE "U.S. Air
Force" that is most like the army than anything else, so it was a kind
of strange, ironic twist.

Hardy: Tell us about your air force XE "U.S. Air Force" experience.

Anderson: To recruit survival training instructors, twice a year
recruiters come down from the survival school to the basic training
base. XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psy1" . At the survival school
they select people out from basic training and they train for six
months. Though it probably began at an earlier age, it was the
crystallization of my beliefs at that point, the survival school, that
illuminated a lot of things. I’ve always had an empathy for animals and,
actually, an empathy for the less powerful, those who are unempowered,
whether it be people, playing on a team, team sports. I always liked
joining the losing side.

In the air force XE "U.S. Air Force" , part of our job was to teach
people how to skin out a big game animal. That, despite the fact that in
a modern survival situation, food is almost a non-existent need, because
survival experiences don’t last that long. However, we had a three-week
course at that time for pilots and air crew. After classroom
instruction, we took to the field for six days. We also brought along a
domestically-raised rabbit XE "rabbits" . They constructed a cage of
twigs and sticks and whatnot. I became attached to this rabbit. Even
during training, I was told to kill my first rabbit, and it was
excruciating. I killed that rabbit and I put the eyeballs in my mouth to
show students that the saline solution was good. It was survival. It
went against everything I felt all my life, every empathy, every
experience. I sometimes wonder if it’s genetic.

Oral history does kind of a strange thing because it makes you reflect,
and so I think the person being interviewed gets a value from this. It
makes me sit back and look at myself and my life and experience and I
start to remember these things.

The air force XE "U.S. Air Force" was like that XE "vegetarianism" \\r
"veg1" . I got around that — because it was required to kill the rabbit
— by making the air crews do it. Usually the highest-ranking officer
would end up having to kill the rabbit because everybody else didn’t
want to. It would be a captain, major, or lieutenant colonel. My
students impressed upon me that they were just so disconnected from
their food source. This is what they do every day — eat meat. It was a
nanosecond later that I had to reflect that upon myself. In the mirror I
saw the person who was being hypocritical and acting against everything
I felt. So it was, I’d say, 1968 or so, early 1968, I began my journey
as a vegetarian.

Hardy: While still in the air force XE "U.S. Air Force" ?

Anderson: Yes. It’s funny now. It was before Diet for a Small Planet XE
"Diet for a Small Planet \[book\]" came out and anything about
nutrition. I had no guideposts to follow. I did silly things like going
into the field without a good diet. It was very strenuous. You had to go
through the mountains and not trails, but by compass into the woods. I
was bringing bags of shredded salad from the supermarket and some salad
dressing, thinking that’s vegetarianism. I had no idea what I was doing.
After a few lightheaded experiences and being dizzy and out of energy, I
had to teach myself. The very first help was Diet for a Small Planet XE
"Diet for a Small Planet \[book\]" , where she talked about combining
food sources. She’s the first person I found to talk about amino acids.
Even though the amino acid combination story has been changed — people
have grown beyond that. It was my first saving grace and allowed me to
continue as a healthy human being and a vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" at
the same time.

Hardy: You’re still doing the survival training at this point?

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: How many tours of duty did you do? What was your term of service?

Anderson: I had signed up for four years. I was supposed to get out in
1971. This was during the time of the Vietnam XE "Vietnam War" War and
it was a very fortunate time to be alive, because you had publicly
stated all types of alternative realities and points of view. I came out
of the suburbs. I had no idea. I was an innocent, relatively, accepting
the standard cultural norms. But the Vietnam XE "Vietnam War" War was
raging. The same empathy I had for those animals I had for friends in
the military. When I was in my last year of high school, I was actually
sending care packages to a friend who unfortunately joined the army at a
very early age and went to Vietnam XE "Vietnam War" . I was sending
socks and things like that.

But I became involved XE "antiwar movement" \\r "anti1" (while in the
air force XE "U.S. Air Force" as a survival instructor) in the Spokane,
Washington XE "Washington:Spokane" , antiwar movement. More and more I
became disenfranchised and having to deal with my responsibility and my
part in waging war against people I had no desire to harm. I came to a
point and I went to Canada XE "Canada" . I went into the mountains with
a friend, backpacking way up in the Canadian Rockies, and I made my
decision. I went to Vancouver XE "Canada:Vancouver" . I checked out the
services there for veterans who deserted and left the country and went
to Canada. I found out there was a support system. I made up my mind
that if I couldn’t get out of the air force XE "U.S. Air Force" and stop
doing what I was doing, that I in turn would go to Canada.

Mind you, at this point I was a sergeant in the air force XE "U.S. Air
Force" and I had my number for staff sergeant stripes. When I came back,
aside from survival training, part of my job was instructing air crews
in resistance to enemy interrogation. We would volunteer for that job,
and at this time I was doing that. It’s a simulation of enemy captivity.
You interrogate people. You try to break them down and use different
techniques. I went and I told them that I could not do my job anymore. I
simply couldn’t do it.

Well, I was sent back to my barracks. I was put under barracks arrest.
Then court martial charges were set against me. You can imagine for me,
somebody from white-bread America, what this is like. I had no support
structure locally. I was charged with refusing to obey a lawful order.
Uh-huh. I didn’t know at the time that there was a system set up for
conscientious objectors. It wasn’t made known to me for a while. I
didn’t know how to go about it. But as charges were laid against me, I
saw the equivalent of a military attorney who told me there was a
process. However, I had gone over the line already, so those charges
were still pending against me. I was under arrest. My stripes were taken
away from me.

I was saved by other non-commissioned officers and officers going to the
base commander and saying I was being railroaded — which I was, in
retrospect — that I wasn’t getting any due process, and that the system
set up for people like me hadn’t been used in recent memory on that
base. Everybody was learning from scratch. The commander listened and
then intervened and halted the court martial charges while my request
and the process for becoming a conscientious objector proceeded. Over
time — it took months — I was given a job that wasn’t supposed to be
conflicting with my beliefs. I was on my knees in front of the base
commander’s office clipping grass, selling tea to raise money for United
Way at classes. Generally all my high performance reports were suddenly
negative and I was a terrible soldier and all that sort of thing. I
didn’t care at that point because I was overjoyed at my commitment.

On Friday the 13th I received word that, indeed — they actually got the
word in the morning but they wanted to wait the entire day — that my
discharge had been approved. So I got out after three years and some odd
days of military service. I got an honorable discharge, which to me was
important at that time. But by then I had been a vegetarian XE
"vegetarianism" for over two years, so it was part of a larger set of
beliefs about humanity, our place in the world, and how you treat other
living, feeling beings.

Hardy: You went in in ’67.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: Then you’re honorably discharged in 1970.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: And it’s after you’ve been in about a year that you become a
vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" \\r "veg2" ?

Anderson: It was less than a year, I think.

Hardy: Less than a year.

Anderson: I don’t recall exactly XE "rabbits" \\r "rab1" . It was sort
of a creeping thing that was there. I remember the day I killed the
rabbit, I think, during training that it really set things off.

Hardy: This was the first rabbit that you killed or you had been doing
this for a while?

Anderson: No, this was the first one.

Hardy: This was the first one.

Anderson: I had sent complaints in about it. I wanted to get around it.
We were winter survival camping at the time up in Idaho XE "Idaho" .
Somebody came out and talked to me and blah, blah, blah. But it sort of
went on and on. I was doing everything else well, so I just sort of
worked around it. People ignored it for a while.

Hardy: But you had already been through all the survival training at
this point, because you’re an instructor at this point.

Anderson: During the training I killed the first rabbit. Then when it
came to being an instructor, I found a way around it by having the
student group carry it out.

Hardy: What did the guys in your unit think when you told them that you
weren’t going to eat meat anymore?

Anderson: I don’t recall. I don’t remember. I know for a lot of people —
obviously, it set me apart. There were four different groups within the
training unit, A, B, C, and D. When you went into the field you rotated
classes through, so there’s a constant flow through, unit A followed by
unit B the next week and on. The people in my unit, I think, some people
that I knew very well, were friends, were fine with it. But there were
people. I don’t think I was ever ostracized directly, but I don’t recall
details.

Hardy: Where were you based during all of this?

Anderson: In Spokane XE "Washington:Spokane" .

Hardy: So what happens when you leave the air force XE "U.S. Air Force"
then? And this is when in ’70?

Anderson: November. It was October or November. October 13th or November
13th, I forget which now. I stayed in Spokane. I went to school, but I
was heavily involved in the antiwar movement XE "antiwar movement"
there, organizing protests and peace marches with local folks. I didn’t
really have an income or much of an income. I lived in a small cabin
with a wood-burning stove in a small valley in the city. I used to have
those Fords drive by like you used to see in movies of the FBI XE
"Federal Bureau of Investigation" taking photographs and looking around
all the time. It was kind of strange. It was my first civilian run-in
with authority.

But we successfully pulled off a number of demonstrations in Spokane. At
a certain point, I was waiting for a friend to get out of the air force
from his normal tour so we could go to Europe, and we did. We finally
left and went overseas. We took a freighter and went to Europe. \[I\]
worked for a while. I didn’t have any money, and so I ended up getting a
job in Farchant, Germany, and in Garmisch, Germany XE "Germany" , doing
different jobs, everything from a plastic factory to a ski lift
attendant and other duties.

Then on Christmas day I set out overland for India XE "India" . The
journey lasted a year, and I could spend a lot of time talking about the
experience and finally comparing my romanticized view of the world in
its reality, including my being conned out of funds in Istanbul XE
"Turkey:Istanbul" . Mind you, I had a few hundred dollars in my pocket.
My hair was growing longer by the day. But I was seeing the world, the
people, the cultures, like never before. My grandmother came to my
rescue. She sent me \$300 in Istanbul XE "Turkey:Istanbul" . I got
\$300, and in totally oblivion to being responsible for planning the
future, I just went to India XE "India" . It took me some time overland
through Afghanistan XE "Afghanistan" and around into Pakistan XE
"Pakistan" . The India-Pakistan war was going on, so I finally got a
boat out of Karachi XE "Pakistan:Karachi" to Bombay XE "India:Bombay" ,
a passenger ferry, a deck passenger, and stayed in India for three
months, traveling by train, bus, place to place, slowly made my way back
overland. Again, it took a year. It was a life-altering experience.

Hardy: How so?

Anderson: It just put me in a place — it gave me perspective XE
"psychological aspects" \\r "psy2" . You know those postcards you see
\[with\] the universe spinning around and “you are here.” I was there. I
knew my place and my center. It’s hard to describe. It’s experiential.
It’s been a place that I go back to and a place I try to get back to
many times, because I felt very much at peace XE "India" .

Hardy: Were you doing yoga or meditation? The Beatles have already been
there.

Anderson: Yes. \[Laughter\].

Hardy: So you’re either doing a lot of drugs or you were doing
meditation.

Anderson: I was doing both XE "spirituality" . Yes. Drugs in the early
years, before I traveled to India XE "India" . It stripped away reality
and it made you go, “Oh!” or “Oh?” or “oh.” Drugs were a different
meaning in those days, at least for us. It wasn’t to get high or to feel
funny; it was a trip and it was experiencing other realities. It didn’t
destroy your reality as much as build others and open you up. The goal
wasn’t to take drugs all the time. It was to learn from your experience
and to go back there without them, and so it was a spiritual experience,
the wow factor, which I think a lot of people can relate to from our
generation. When I was traveling I actually stopped doing drugs when
they were most available.

It was restful. Life was simple. The only Western clothes I had was a
pair of jeans and a t-shirt, and the rest of them were just simple
garments in a small bag. I traveled around. Life was simple. I lived on
the beach, walked, listened, felt, experienced. I think a lot of the
work I have been doing is trying to pay back that gift.

Hardy: Can you elaborate on that?

Anderson: The world — there are a lot of practical aspects to the diet,
and, what we eat has an impact. That ties into the work I had been doing
on the environment XE "ethics and morality" . It is a different
perspective than a lot of people have. But there’s suffering in the
world and many causes, but one of the most widespread, preventable
avenues for creating suffering is how we eat and how we live, the
choices we make, and being aware and caring about that and trying to get
everybody to realize that is kind of like trying to get everybody to
appreciate the same song. There are a lot of tastes in music out there.
“This sounds so good. Why doesn’t everybody appreciate it?” You want to
broadcast it to everybody all at once. So trying to pay it back is
simply trying to reduce suffering in the world. It’s not just animal
suffering, which is immense, but people suffering as well.

Perhaps — I don’t know if I want to branch off yet, but the environment
will not be saved without some essential things being done. One of them
is changing our diet.

Hardy: Let’s move forward in time. We’ll get to all this. So you come
back from India XE "India" in 19 —

Anderson: ’72 or so.

Hardy: Then what takes place next?

Anderson: I’m happy. I’m back to see my friends. I remember the shock of
going to supermarkets after spending so much time — I didn’t spend a lot
of time in the cities — in impoverished places. When I was in
Afghanistan XE "Afghanistan" I was walking along roads and there were
literally camel caravans going around. I’ve got a photograph of this one
person in the desert picking sagebrush for firewood in the middle of
nowhere. This was because I was on an Afghani government bus, apparently
a mail bus, and since it had snowed we got stuck. I kept coming back
after buying the bus ticket and being told, “Oh, next day.” I’d come
back the next day. You buy your ticket and you come back for three or
four or five days before actually leaving. There’s no real sense of
time, which is what I got from that trip as well.

But in Afghanistan XE "Afghanistan" I’d walk into a shop, and one person
would be selling a small basket of onions. That was it. In the US I’d
walk into a supermarket and I couldn’t make decisions —so many types of
cereals, so much abundance always packed in bright colors. It was
disorienting in North America after all that time away, after a year of
such a different experience.

I was here for a while. I’m trying to recall what I did then. I think I
picked up mostly odd jobs. I had no real place to plug into. I think I
was just simply being a hippie. At this point I had a long beard and my
hair was down to about the middle of my back. I was experiencing life
with my friends. I didn’t have any place to plug into, Spokane XE
"Washington:Spokane" , 1972-73. Before leaving for India, I had gotten
somewhat involved just after the air force XE "U.S. Air Force" with some
city council resolutions and trying to get the city council to take a
position on the Vietnam XE "Vietnam War" War. We took our ribbons and
all that sort of thing and presented them to the council, turned them
in, that sort of thing. But I wasn’t really engaged with institutions
here. I did become involved with things like recycling by writing some
articles in the local underground paper, also with pesticides and other
things like that. But I didn’t know of any organizations at the time. A
lot of it is a little fuzzy to me, but I was in Spokane for a while.

Then XE "agriculture" \\r "ag1" I decided to join the Peace Corps XE
"Peace Corps" . I don’t think I had been back a year. My idealism took
me to the Peace Corps, which, in retrospect, was a mistake, because I
felt I failed in that. I went through the training. They sent me to west
Africa, Sierra Leone XE "Sierra Leone" . I was going to show the farmers
how to develop rice, the new high-yielding varieties which just happened
to be highly depended on imported, expensive fertilizer. We were also
changing natural swamps into rice paddies. I thought obviously they
needed it, but the approach was to bring in outside technology and
varieties and to pretty much decimate natural systems. It wasn’t
permaculture. This was agriculture.

Of our training group, I ended up being sent to the most far out village
which took days to get to on a moped, motorbike. I was really
discouraged because they sent me there. It was beginning of the rainy
season, and so there wasn’t anything I could do at the time. I sat in my
hut and didn’t have any money to make repairs. The Peace Corps pay
system was screwed up. I didn’t speak the language. I don’t know how
many dialects and languages there were in Sierra Leone XE "Sierra Leone"
, but they just gave us a week or two of language, and it was an
English-based common denominator sort of language. I was sent to the
village of Foria.

Sweet, sweet people there. What it amounted to was I was sitting there
socially isolated during rainy season. I was going nuts. I would sit
there with food. Then I found out that the reason I was given such a
large amount of food was to share it with the children who had no food
in the village. There was a religious teacher there who was getting
pretty wealthy off the labor of his students. So I would go out during
the day. They’re trying to construct this new rice paddy in the rainy
season — not a good time. I saw this one person who had the nicest house
in the village. They’re making money off this, I thought. The neediest
were not benefiting because of tribal politics. I didn’t delve too
deeply into the culture and the paramount chiefs and who paid whom for
what, because obviously some people were benefiting from this — my work
— but not others in need. It was a good reality test, I think, for me
there.

After several months, which included training and all that, I asked to
go, and I did. I consider it a personal failure to this day, because I
couldn’t find a way to make it work.

Hardy: How much time in Sierra Leone XE "Sierra Leone" then?

Anderson: I don’t know. Three or four months all together?

Hardy: So you requested from the Peace Corps XE "Peace Corps" then to —

Anderson: To go back home.

Hardy: To go back home.

Anderson: I’m trying to recall XE "environmental issues/environmental
movement" \\r "env1" . I lost the concept of time some time ago. Maybe
it’s my age. But after I came back from India XE "India" I didn’t have a
lot of “time posts” that I grabbed onto. After I went back so Spokane XE
"Washington:Spokane" I ended up finishing my two-year degree there.
Eventually I made my way to Seattle XE "Washington:Seattle" , where my
parents were. That’s when I went to — shortly after that I went up to
school, as I recall, in Bellingham XE "Washington:Bellingham" . They had
a degree program in human ecology, which interested me because it put
cultures, their tools, and how they interact with their environment in
perspective. Just recently I got in touch with an old professor up
there.

I didn’t stay there that long either because I disagreed with everybody
XE "ethics and morality" . My perspective, my traveling experience, had
me feeling these are more people who think the solution is more
technology and more ownership of world resources. “The Tragedy of the
Commons” XE "Tragedy of the Commons \[magazine article\]" by Garrett
Hardin XE "Hardin, Garrett" stood out. Everybody was celebrating that as
the biggest idea and watershed concept. But everything I heard was
coming from the fact that the commons, the tragedy, and the lifeboat
ethics that float from that, the resources were really “our” resources,
our shared resources. It didn’t sit well. Yet, I enjoyed the experience.
I was there for one semester.

Towards the end of that semester XE "whales" \\r "whale1" , by chance I
— oh, at that time also I became involved with Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace" . I was taken aback and away by the concept of these folks
being antinuclear but also going out to save the whales XE "whales" . I
bought the image. I went to Vancouver XE "Canada:Vancouver" , the site
of the international office. That began my career in environmental work,
and it came through animals, it came through whales. Whales were my
doorway.

I raised funds there in Bellingham XE "Washington:Bellingham" while at
school and went to the send-off of the Phyllis Cormack XE "Phyllis
Cormack \[vessel\]" , which was a huge event in Vancouver XE
"Canada:Vancouver" . I was just amazed. It was a social movement, which
seems so absent in this day and age. People were involved — huge parades
of people to send people off to save the whales XE "whales" . Robert
Hunter XE "Hunter, Robert" , who was a journalist and still is, was very
good in those days about creating the image and getting people on board
and getting the media aboard and using the media as a conduit to get the
message out and to get people motivated. Well, it worked. The Phyllis
Cormack XE "Phyllis Cormack \[vessel\]" had a glorious send-off.

Shortly thereafter, I was hitchhiking from school to home in Bellingham,
Washington, and this person picked me up. He was driving to Alaska XE
"Alaska" . When was this? When I was in Spokane XE "Washington:Spokane"
, one of the odd jobs I had — I’m backing up a little bit — was a river
raft guide. I had a string of odd jobs there. But I once I got to
Bellingham XE "Washington:Bellingham" , I had gone and decided I’m going
to Alaska. That I did.

Hardy: Okay. Before we get to Alaska XE "Alaska" , you go to Bellingham
XE "Washington:Bellingham" . Is it Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" that
attracted you there?

Anderson: To Bellingham XE "Washington:Bellingham" ? No. The school.
Going to school.

Hardy: The school. Where was Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" located?

Anderson: In Vancouver XE "Canada:Vancouver" , B.C.

Hardy: Vancouver, British Columbia.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: So you went to Vancouver, British Columbia, drawn there by
Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" .

Anderson: Yes. I didn’t move there. I went for this event for a number
of days.

Hardy: For the launch.

Anderson: For the launch of the Phyllis Cormack XE "Phyllis Cormack
\[vessel\]" ’s voyage to save the whales XE "whales" , yes.

Hardy: What can you tell us about your first introduction to Greenpeace
XE "Greenpeace" in Vancouver XE "Canada:Vancouver" ?

Anderson: Inspiring and also, as it turns out, they ended up being my
first plug-in to a non-government organization, in this case an
environmental anti-nuclear group, in which I could put my energy into
and contribute to. That actually didn’t happen until after I had gone to
Alaska XE "Alaska" . Then I left Alaska for a few winter months. During
the winter months I would regularly leave Alaska, which I’ll go into
later. But I had gone back to Vancouver XE "Canada:Vancouver" and told
them I wanted to open an office in Anchorage XE "Alaska:Anchorage" .
This was after I had been living in Fairbanks XE "Alaska:Fairbanks" ,
Alaska, a year. I had also worked on the Alaska pipeline for a while.
But it was over time — \[recording interruption\].

Hardy: I’m wondering whether it’s this wireless mic. I think your mic is
fine. I’ll sort of \[unclear\] on this one.

Anderson: I’m trying to gain my timeline. I should have cue cards what I
did in what year, because sometimes I don’t have any —

Hardy: We can plug that stuff in later.

\[discussion of recording problems not transcribed\]

Anderson: About my being “sensitive” to about animals being hurt, I’m
trying to figure out where that came from. Actually, I did say that,
didn’t I XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psy3" ?

Hardy: Yes. Any specific examples?

Anderson: I remember I was probably eight or nine. A friend in Chicago
XE "Illinois:Chicago" at the Lincoln Park pond caught a fish, and I
grabbed it and threw it back in. He was really mad at me. \[Laughter\].
But that’s okay.

Hardy: Any idea where this comes from?

Anderson: I don’t know. We’re all such an interesting mix of parts —
part of it’s personality. I think I’ve oftentimes felt I’m in the
middle, outside looking in sort of thing. In high school it was the Rahs
and the Greasers cliques. I didn’t buy into either one of those things,
and so it has always been hard for me to jump on any bandwagon, be it
cultural, or other different, belief systems. I don’t know where it came
from. Skeptic maybe.

Hardy: Why did you go to Alaska XE "Alaska" ?

Anderson: Adventure. It’s the same reason I went to India XE "India" , I
suppose. It was an opportunity. I wanted to work up there, but also
Alaska XE "Alaska" was the great open frontier where there were animals
everywhere and wilderness and things. It was an adventure. I can’t
believe it now, but I ended up living there for about seven years with
breaks during most winters, coming south when it was the coldest and the
darkest. There were a few times I worked well into the winter.

During this time I was also making trips down to Baja XE "Mexico" . I
had heard about the whales in Baja. On my first trip I drove all the way
down from Alaska XE "Alaska" to Baja, stopping at my parents’ in Seattle
XE "Washington:Seattle" , took a break there a bit. Mind you, I didn’t
have a lot of money. I wasn’t very practical in things. I knew where I
wanted to go and what I wanted to experience, and so I found a lagoon in
a small fishing village at the end of a long sandy road, before you get
to La Paz XE "Mexico:La Paz" in the southern end of Baja XE "Mexico"
California. It was Puerto Lopez Mateos XE "Mexico:Puerto Lopez Mateos" .
During the first visit I had this silly army blow-up raft — not army but
some surplus store thing, very silly thing. I’d float out there like a
fool in the lagoon, but I was hooked.

The next year and the year after and the year after that I came back
with a kayak XE "whales" \\r "whale2" . I was better provisioned. I
would kayak out to a long barrier island, a massive long barrier island.
The whales would swim through the various openings in the barrier
island, one being the Boca de Soledad, and into the bay where they would
give birth and raise their calves where the waters were calmer and there
wasn’t so much current.

But I would camp out on this island for weeks at a time, and months at a
time a few years. It was another one of those connecting experiences XE
"Mexico" . I was usually alone. I made friends with Baja Expeditions XE
"Baja Expeditions" folks (a nature-tour company), got free treats and
ice cream from time to time. They were whale watching at the time — they
were the only whale watch boat there. But every morning and night, I
would wake up and go to sleep with the sound of whales breathing. It
was, again, a doorway and a reinforcement. It was a doorway into life.
It was a doorway into the environment. I think for a lot of people there
will be a totem animal of some sort that will bring them in. I think
domestic animals can do the same thing. As for whales, is it the biomass
and the biochemical electrical energy they put out, or is it when they
look you in the eye, or when they line up? Instead of being the whale
watcher, you become the whale watched. They’ll line up and come by your
kayak five feet away and roll over and look at you, one after the other.

Hardy: I have a question here now. How did you hear about Baja XE
"Mexico" ?

Anderson: I don’t recall. Maybe it was a movie or perhaps Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace" . There are a lot of specials on National Geographic XE
"National Geographic Society" . I used to run films at the Alaska XE
"Alaska" state fair — we put up an army tent and used it for a theatre —
and all that sort of thing — when I was doing Greenpeace. Maybe it was a
film on TV or something. I knew there was one lagoon further up north,
Guerro Negro, where the salt works were, and there was a lagoon further
down, which I later found out was where some researchers were, and then
there was a lagoon even more remote and further down that I heard about.
I just went. I just did it.

Hardy: Chronologically, this is before you started Alaska XE "Alaska"
Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" or after?

Anderson: It was before and during.

Hardy: Before and during. So you’re doing some Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace" activities up in Alaska, but it’s —

Anderson: But nothing substantive at first. I’m not sure exactly when,
but on one of my trip stops — it’s fuzzy, unfortunately, to me at this
point. But one of my first stops into Vancouver XE "Canada:Vancouver" ,
I told them I wanted to open an office in Alaska XE "Alaska" . It was
one of these cyclic trips going down and coming up XE "Greenpeace:Alaska
office" . They said, “We can’t fund you, but we can give you Greenpeace
stuff to sell.” At this point, I was living in Homer, Alaska XE
"Alaska:Homer" . One of my vehicles was a ’64 Ford station wagon. I was
actually living in it as a “spit rat.” Homer has this three-mile-long
spit of sand going out into the bay. Summertimes I was out there
kayaking and doing things. It wasn’t until I decided I was going to move
to Anchorage XE "Alaska:Anchorage" , after I had been selling posters
and buttons and things out of the back of the station wagon at the
equivalent of a farmers’ market in Homer, Alaska, that I moved there. I
got on the national board of Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office"
and opened up an office in Anchorage, Alaska, and got funded for it.

Hardy: You got on the national board of Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace"
before you opened the office?

Anderson: No. It was shortly thereafter.

Hardy: Let’s get back to Baja XE "Mexico" . The first time you went
alone XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psy4" .

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: And all the other times you went alone?

Anderson: Yes, actually. In later years I went for visits with various
partners, but the time I spent there was alone. I would meet people at
the whale watching tours, but I camped out alone.

Hardy: You were in your twenties?

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: And you’re spending months by yourself.

Anderson: I would get in my kayak and paddle across the lagoon to the
town, but I would spend a week or so by myself in the sands and walk
across the island. It was essentially a monastic experience.

Hardy: This is not normal behavior for a guy in his twenties.

Anderson: No, it isn’t.

Hardy: What was that about?

Anderson: I think I disconnected. \[Laughter\]. To put it bluntly. I’ve
always had a perspective. I was very much an introvert growing up. It
was very difficult to break out of that. I had to break out of it
somewhat during my political activism over the Vietnam XE "Vietnam War"
War. The air force XE "U.S. Air Force" brought it out a fair amount. The
air force XE "U.S. Air Force" had a lot of beneficial effects on me,
everything from the way I walked to the way I perceived myself and my
self-worth and my self-value. I had a lot of issues regarding that. So
my identity, I think, was formed an awful lot by these experiences.

But you don’t know what other people are experiencing, perhaps. You
assume that the way you see things and believe things are known by other
people and they just don’t act on it. Once in a while you get clues that
your experience is unique and you might have something to contribute.
But I didn’t know that for a long time. I think even today I’m
oftentimes surprised about what people in various movements contribute.
I think a lot of us go through life like that. We just assume what we
experience is a norm or a normal thing and a lot of people know what it
is but just act on it differently. I think that’s a shame. I think we
should all somehow have some way to find out what we have and what we
know which is unique and which might be a good contribution.

Hardy: How were you spending your days in Baja XE "Mexico" ?

Anderson: In my kayak XE "whales" \\r "whale3" . I was on the water hour
after hour after hour XE "science/scientific community" \\r "whale3" . I
had actually gotten — I had applied for a permit from the Mexican
government to do this. I didn’t have any credentials, but I had taken
down tape recorders. I had gone to Edmund Scientific and found a
hydrophone, underwater microphone, and was making recordings. I was
going out to people like Vic Schaffer XE "Schaffer, Vic" , who was an
eminent marine biologist, and I played him recordings. I said, “Whales
are making sounds in these lagoons.” He said, “Write a monograph on
that.” I said, “What’s a monograph?” I didn’t have the academic
credentials or the context to act on it, so I never did that sort of
thing. I did know that people were taking identifying marks, and I was
copying those down and taking photographs, doing that sort of thing, and
compiling information. But I spent my days in a kayak with the whales XE
"whales" . I wasn’t with people; I was with whales and the wind and the
desert.

Hardy: At first it was contemplative and then you started to think more
scientifically about it?

Anderson: I think it was where I was at. No. I think I always had sort
of this — in addition to being there and experiencing this, I wanted to
do something. I’ve always had, I think, an appetite for science.

One year was entirely different XE "music and musicians" \\r "mus1" .
The Paul Winter Consort XE "Paul Winter Consort" — I don’t know if
you’re familiar with them XE "spirituality" \\r "mus1" . They’re jazz
musicians. They came down. I had no idea. They came down there and
decided to put this raft out in the water and play music to the whales
XE "whales" . They had a hot-air balloon there. So I had this whole
experience. I was there already. They were just like, “Oh, show us
around.” So I spent time with them. They had this large platform of oil
barrels and wood, an old thing that they anchored out deep into the
lagoon. So I volunteered to construct this pyramid. We went down to La
Paz XE "Mexico:La Paz" and picked up this conduit for electrical wiring
with these little sleeves with screws in it. I constructed this big old
pyramid that set on this platform on which they would play the cello and
play music. I started sleeping on this platform as well XE "Paul Winter
Consort" .

Not only did I have — this one season, not only did I have the wind and
the water and the sounds of whales XE "whales" breathing, I actually had
harp music and saxophone and all these wonderful, mystical people who
obviously were moved by their experience and didn’t get it there. They
brought it with them. They were already there. They had done concerts in
the Grand Canyon, which was — I’m not sure if it was before or after
that. They were really high-consciousness people who were really
connected. One person was able to give me the equivalent of an
electrical jolt. I wish I could remember her name.

Hardy: Shocked you?

Anderson: Yes. Boy, she grabbed my hand, and I went bam! I was bowled
over. I was not expecting it. I had no preconception of what was going
to happen XE "Paul Winter Consort" .

So there was some variation of experience down there, but each year I
went down and documented and photographed. My driving motivating force
was to be there with the whales XE "whales" in this setting.

Hardy: Then at night you’re sleeping out —

Anderson: In a tent at the water’s edge listening to whales XE "whales"
.

Hardy: How are you eating XE "environmental issues/environmental
movement" \\r "env2" ?

Anderson: Crudely XE "managing an organization" . Beans and rice, beans
and rice. I was really in shape in those days with my kayak. I had a lot
lower body fat than I have now in civilianization. I would come into
town and I would mix with the locals. There wasn’t a restaurant per se.
There were a few people with houses, and I would talk to them and eat
dinner with them once in a while. There was a cannery there. There was
also a big effort to establish a phosphate rock mining company taking
the phosphate from the island and the surrounding land all around the
lagoon. They built this huge processing plant, a government project,
which eventually folded. I tried to fight that. Baja Expeditions’ XE
"Baja Expeditions" Tim Means XE "Means, Tim" became a Mexican citizen
through marriage there, a grizzled old guy now. He got me into some
meetings down there. This eventually led to my going back to Alaska XE
"Alaska" and founding Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" Alaska in
Anchorage XE "Alaska:Anchorage" .

Hardy: So it’s your actions then in Baja XE "Mexico" that are
encouraging or motivating you to —

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: How so?

Anderson: I had reality stuck in my face. There were issues in Alaska XE
"Alaska" that I was aware of as well, from the oil and gas drilling to
the hunting XE "hunting" of wolves XE "wolves" from the air. I wish I
had some clear memory of how that all fell together. I remember in
Fairbanks XE "Alaska:Fairbanks" trying to get a recycling program
together, but I was doing it without any context, without any
organization. It was just grass-roots lobbying.

When I got to Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" , it was the first formal
approach to things, an organization approach. So I got the backing of
Greenpeace in Vancouver XE "Canada:Vancouver" , got on — at the same
time — it was an interesting juxtaposition because Greenpeace, it was an
organic growth. You could open up an office anywhere, but then the
practicalities of running organizations pitted Greenpeace San Francisco
XE "Greenpeace:San Francisco office" , USA, \[against\] Greenpeace
Canada XE "Canada" for control. There were lawsuits. I was brought into
this as a board member. I had very little experience with their
experience of each other. People had gone on campaigns and were dear to
one another and had gone through the equivalent of war together. There
was a lot of infighting for control.

I was courted for my vote and my support during this whole thing. I
didn’t know what to do. I was there for the animals. But I did get
involved in part of that. I stayed clear of it mostly because of my
location in Alaska XE "Alaska" , but I did get on the national board of
Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace:San Francisco office" USA. They did get
control of the US “territory.” Money flowed to me to do campaigns and
open an office. I had a board of directors in Alaska. I founded the
Alaska office and continued on XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" .

Hardy: This is in 1978?

Anderson: Maybe around there. I don’t think I can pull a date out.

Hardy: So in ’78 you’re about thirty years old at this point.

Anderson: Yes. I’d have to actually go back and research my life.

Hardy: You sent us something.

Anderson: Oh, my résumé.

Hardy: I’ve got your résumé. So ’78 is when you become executive
director of Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" Alaska. I’m
assuming you become executive director when you set up the chapter.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: And you’re born in ’48.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: So you’re about thirty. Just to back up before we get you on the
national board, why specifically did you want to form a chapter of
Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" in Alaska? Any particular
trigger?

Anderson: I think it was by happenstance. During school I did
fundraising for Greenpeace. They’re the only group that I really knew,
and it was pretty organic in the way it happened. They’re there. They
had the issues. I was proud to be part of that organization. I don’t
think there’s anything I saw a niche for. I didn’t think of it that way.
“I’d be happy to open an office. It’d be great to work for you guys.”
They thought it was a great idea as well because of the issues of
bowhead whaling through the Inupiat up north, and oil and gas
exploration, and the oil and whale mix. There are just lots of things
going on, a lot at stake in Alaska XE "Alaska" . I think they were just
happy to do it.

Hardy: Time to take a break.

\[End Disk 1; Begin Disk 2 of 4\]

Lee: — other social issues. Their life stories are relevant to so many
different facets, on how people become activists and how people connect
to the world.

Anderson: A lot of it, I think, has to do with how your worldview is
formed XE "psychological aspects" . If you pay attention, we can’t do
everything, and we all have different callings, but I think life
experiences make you pay attention. You grow up with a norm. We accept
it. But if that norm is rocked through experience or somebody’s
influence or a combination of these things, you start seeing things so
much differently. You notice them. I notice the meat commercials and I
notice how much advertising and reinforcement there is for meat. I
notice when I drive through the countryside the trails that cattle and
sheep make on the hillside and impact the environment. I see the impacts
constantly. It grabs me constantly. I passed truckloads, both empty and
full, of laying hens going to slaughter while driving here to Portland
XE "Oregon:Portland" .

Hardy: I’m going to put an ID on this tape. This is tape two. This is
just if they get this confused.

So XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp1" we’ve XE "politics" got you to
the founding of Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" Alaska with
sort of no particular trigger issue, just 1978. What’s your first
campaign? What do you do once you set it up?

Anderson: Goodness XE "environmental issues/environmental movement" \\r
"env3" . We were multitasking XE "Native Americans" . I know we did a
small roadside XE "public relations/outreach" spraying XE "oil and gas
industries" of herbicides campaign. Our biggest campaign was oil and gas
offshore oil exploration and its impacts on the wildlife, especially
whales XE "whales" and seals XE "seals" . It covered seismic testing,
the dumping of drilling muds and other impacts. Mind you, there were
much larger groups, influential groups — I actually shared a building
with them just after the Alaska Native Lands Settlement Act XE "Alaska
Native Lands Settlement Act" was passed — that had preceded a lot of my
work.

So we were sort of the upstart organization, but at the same time, we
built alliances with other organizations to try and mitigate some of the
wide open oil and gas exploration and its impacts XE "Greenpeace:Alaska
office" . A lot of it was on the North Slope and it involved Native
American communities, so a lot of the work was trying to figure out how
to build alliances with them, as well as trying to understand how to
slow — the difficult part was that the indigenous villages both
supported and benefited from oil and gas exploration up there, at the
same time they hated the impacts to the environment and their lifestyle.
It also played a role in other issues such as aboriginal whaling.
Bowhead whaling up there had very close scrutiny, unlike the more recent
Makah whaling, in which they had to do a lot of justification
nutritionally, a lot of studies. A lot of painstaking effort went into
that with bowheads.

Oil XE "hunting" \\r "hunt1" XE "whales" \\r "hunt1" and gas, for
instance, would have an impact in that it brought so much money into the
community that whaling captains who once were few in the village
(because you had to have wealth to conduct whaling) — the whaling
captain numbers exploded because they had the money to outfit crews with
oil and gas wealth coming in. So you had a larger number of whaling
crews going out, inexperienced captains and crews, a far larger number
of whales being struck and lost. In other words, they had this whaling
equipment — the shoulder guns and the darting guns they called them — to
kill whales, which were used by whalers in the 1800s, but they didn’t
know how to use them. They were wounding whales constantly. All these
things were interplaying as we went up there to talk about oil and gas.
Oil and gas was a large part of our initial efforts XE
"Greenpeace:Alaska office" .

We also got involved in aerial wolf XE "wolves" hunting. There’s the
Airborne Hunting Act XE "Airborne Hunting Act" , which prohibits
shooting animals and hunting from airplanes. There were exceptions to
the law made in which people would gun down entire packs of wolves XE
"wolves" from airplanes to control the wolf population, which in turn
was requested because of crashing moose populations, which in turn was
spurned on by both subsistence hunters and sport hunters killing too
many moose (and caribou as well) in some areas. So they wanted to kill
enough wolves off for the herds to be balanced so that sports hunters
could go out and kill more moose and caribou.

There was also another conflict going on between sports hunters and the
subsistence hunters in these villages. So it was politically and
socially very complex. You’d go to public hearings — very hostile. I
would go into these areas in which I was the one person testifying on
behalf of the environment and wildlife. There would be a board member on
the Alaska XE "Alaska" Board of Game saying, “Do you know what would be
a good idea? Putting your head on the wall.” That sort of atmosphere and
trying to make headway with people who had no idea of why I was there,
what I believed in, or what the organizations believed in, is what I
dealt with every day.

So aerial wolf XE "wolves" hunting XE "hunting" , oil and gas, herbicide
issues were some of the biggest things that consumed a lot of our time.

Hardy: What experience or training did you have from Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace" before you started the Alaska XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office"
chapter?

Anderson: There were no hurdles I had to get through XE "managing an
organization" \\r "org1" . I think just the fact that I was able to
establish an office and go through the paperwork and procedures and to
create campaigns and write press releases was enough. I had no training
from them I just created the offices and solved problems. I just did
them. You know how you can be a survival mechanic with a car? You’re not
a mechanic, but you go in and you do what you have to do and you tinker
around, and you just make it work. Then we had our board members who, of
course, contributed as well as time went on.

Hardy: Any mentors?

Anderson: No.

Hardy: No one showed you the ropes?

Anderson: No. When we got into lawsuits and I worked with attorneys, I
would learn from them how they did things, as far as writing
depositions, seeing how arguments were made. Reading environmental
impact statements and seeing the comments that other people made, I
would learn from other people’s work. But I really didn’t have anybody
there to hold my hand.

Hardy: Who did you get for the board XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" ?

Anderson: Folks. We had four or five people. I’m not sure how I ran into
them or how we started working together. I remember one woman’s name,
Oro Briscoe XE "Briscoe, Oro" . She eventually worked for the oil
companies for a while as their environmentalist who had influence over
them. So it was interesting. We had a pretty small board of directors,
and I don’t recall how that whole dynamic came about. It was a long time
ago, it seems.

Hardy: How many people working with you? Were you a one-man operation,
or did you muster together other volunteers?

Anderson: After we got established and we had a physical office open, we
were able to muster other volunteers. We sold merchandise in part of the
office. We had two or three desks. It was all volunteer; they weren’t
paid staff for the most part. We did some of our own fundraising with
some large events. But we had at times groups of a dozen or more
volunteers helping us out with various events and projects. Most of it
was a small group of us. We did a few demonstrations. I remember we
marched through the Anchorage Daily News XE "Anchorage Daily News"
office with some coffins and things for the aerial wolf XE "wolves" hunt
because the reporting was so bad, which is supposed to be taboo, but we
did it anyway. We were just a bunch of folks doing what we felt needed
to be done. It fit well in with the rural character of Alaska XE
"Alaska" and people’s perceptions of how you should go about doing
things. We weren’t sharp, flashy-dressing up for this and that. We just
did it XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" .

Hardy: Who is we?

Anderson: Again, some board members and some volunteers.

Hardy: Anybody else stand out or who was sort of a compatriot in arms?

Anderson: I’m trying to remember names from 1978, and I’m having a hard
time. I’ve got their faces. If I looked in some of my older address
books — even a couple of years ago we were sending — and I apologize for
not being able to pull your name up tonight. Good people. One was a
carpenter. I’m trying to remember the names. There was one couple
especially that were very effective and very helpful.

Hardy: What were your successes and your failures XE "Greenpeace:Alaska
office" ?

Anderson: I think successes were being able to draw on other resources
that were around XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp2" . Reaching out to
the media — I think we did a pretty good job of that, because there
weren’t many people around doing the kind of work we did, and creating a
presence and a voice, which would not have been there. Failures, I think
— the failures were eventually the office closed after I left for a
couple of years. Then it reopened and it was reopened after they got
funding again.

I think our failures were a failure to actually stop the aerial wolf XE
"wolves" hunt XE "hunting" . We criticized it and brought opposition,
but in the end they still killed wolves. We couldn’t even come close to
matching the power of the hunting lobby there. We had impact and
influence, but it wasn’t decisive. We were able to speak for people, but
I think the failure was it wasn’t enough to save those wolves who were
killed. Gordon Haber XE "Haber, Gordon" was one of the scientists XE
"science/scientific community" who was somewhat controversial. He’s
outspoken for a scientist, for a scientist in those days especially. We
were able to give voice to him. We were able to get some money to him so
he could publish his data from his field notes and give him some support
for that XE "wolves" . To me, failure is not really having decisive
victories. You don’t get a lot of them in animal work XE "hunting" . You
just don’t. Nor the environment, actually. That’s why we go to court so
much XE "Greenpeace:Alaska office" .

Hardy: How did you get on the national board of Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace" ?

Anderson: Somewhat XE "managing an organization" \\r "org2" XE
"environmental issues/environmental movement" \\r "org2" XE
"funding/finance" \\r "org2" serendipity and somewhat the fact that it
was so obvious Alaska XE "Alaska" was chunk off by itself. I had gone
and presented, I think, some reports and updates on the office. I think
they were so impressed with the fact that I was able to do that that
they were happy to have me on there. I don’t think I was there for more
than a couple of years.

One thing I discovered at this point was people with good hearts and
environmentalists and activists weren’t necessarily good business
managers. Nonprofits today are far different than they were in those
days. I don’t think just environmental non-government organizations
(NGOs); I think for nonprofits in general, standards and professionalism
and education weren’t geared up to train people to be specifically
nonprofit managers. Leadership, I think, was far more organic. So you
ended up having, instead of structure like a business, it wasn’t run as
a business. It was run as a set of personalities, which is fraught with
problems because you didn’t have structure and you didn’t have something
that lived beyond when you left.

Hardy: So this is before Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" became the world’s
largest environmental organization.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: With a multi-million dollar multinational —

Anderson: Yes. This is during the Wonder Bread years of Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace" , ate your white bread. It just wasn’t very sophisticated
consistently. It was organic. It went through all kinds of inner
cataclysmic turmoil, with people wanting to keep grass roots versus the
people who said, “We’ve got to professionalize this. We’re handling all
this money.” We’d sit in board meetings and we’d say, “Okay, what’s our
budget this year?” At that time, maybe a couple million dollars. We’d
just bring our proposals to the board, and we’d all say, “Yes, that
sounds good.” We’d sit down there and try and divvy up the money to do
good things.

It was effective in one part because it was grass roots. There wasn’t as
much overhead as you would have in, say, a mega-corporation. People used
it in a heartfelt way. But at the same time, they wouldn’t perhaps
strike the best deals with commercial mailing firms, who were starting
to get involved, to send out mailing pieces, and protocols, and
organizational structure. And just behavior, interpersonal behavior, was
more like family than it was — perhaps an ill-behaved family at times.
But just genuine and sweet good people who sacrificed a lot to do what
they were doing, and not overpaid in the least.

Hardy: You’re in Alaska XE "Alaska" during this time.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: And you’re coming down for board meetings?

Anderson: Yes. Flying down.

Hardy: What were the big initiatives of the national board at that point
XE "Greenpeace" ?

Anderson: A lot XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp3" XE "whales" \\r
"camp3" XE "seals" \\r "camp3" XE "hunting" \\r "camp3" of it had to do
with whaling voyages still. There were various vessels going out. They
hadn’t gotten deeply into fisheries yet. But every region would have its
own specific — board members were generally from different parts of the
country. So some were working on, like out of New England, fish products
that were being imported that had support for whaling. But whaling was a
key thing. And sealing — the Newfoundland XE "Canada:Newfoundland"
sealing efforts up there were still a very big part of the campaign. At
that time, a number of organizations were specializing in seal issues.
The International Fund for Animal Welfare XE "International Fund for
Animal Welfare (IFAW)" (IFAW) was doing a very good job. They had grown
really big. I actually got some funding from them several years ago for
other work.

Those issues really dominated a lot of what was going on. A lot of the
other campaigns were sort of reflective of that. But everybody had their
pet project. In Hawaii XE "Hawaii" it was the Hawaiian monk seal XE
"seals" , and they had projects going on there. Other people were doing
dolphin work and aquarium dolphinariums and cetaceans in captivity.
There was quite a large spectrum of issues, but the vessels of
Greenpeace took up an awful lot of that organization’s resources. For a
while, lawsuits also took a good chunk of money as well. There was some
interaction with Native American communities doing outreach for that.

Hardy: You’re on the board for —

Anderson: I don’t recall. Maybe a year and a half, two years XE
"Greenpeace" .

Hardy: What happened? Why did you leave the board?

Anderson: When I was in Alaska XE "Alaska" during this time, because it
wasn’t a corporate entity so much run like a business, I didn’t have any
health insurance. My back was going out. I had to quit my job to get
veterans benefits so I could have back surgery, a disc operated on. It
wasn’t like bam, bam, bam. It was an on-and-off thing for quite a while.
I had taken a trip — not disabled, disabled, but it impacted my life a
great deal. I had taken one trip to Hawaii XE "Hawaii" and found out it
relaxed my back and the lifestyle was good. So after surgery I took my
job back.

Hardy: What’s your job?

Anderson: Back in Alaska XE "Alaska" I went back to being Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace:Alaska office" again.

Hardy: That’s paying the bills?

Anderson: Yes. I forget, but my back still wasn’t quite right, but I
also felt a call to Hawaii XE "Hawaii" and decided to go to Hawaii. I
actually moved there for a short time for a while and had various jobs
until I got the job I wanted. I worked as everything from a pool boy to
survival jobs, whatever it took to be. I finally got the job I wanted,
which was working on a catamaran that went from Lahaina XE
"Hawaii:Lahaina" in Maui over to Molokai and Lanai. I was a deckhand and
I was a whale watch XE "whales" narrator during the season and taught
snorkeling and was involved in some environmental issues, but it was
tangential to my job as a deckhand.

Throughout my life I’ve done the nonprofit work and taken breaks from
it. There are very, very few old guys and gals who are activists XE
"animal rights movement/animal protection community" . As time goes on,
you need health insurance. You start aging, you get tired, you burn out.
If you’re not going to burn out, you’ve really got to get into a quiet,
well-established large organization that can provide these services for
you and take care of you as you do your job, or you need to take breaks.
I’ve done that. I’ve cycled on and off all my life, being specifically
and officially in a position with an organization and then off.

Hardy: So this was a break from Alaska XE "Alaska" .

Anderson: Yes, this was a break from Alaska XE "Alaska" big time. Seven
years.

Hardy: Anything precipitate that in particular or just a general —

Anderson: Mostly get my back back together. I was definitely kind of
burned out on the Alaska XE "Alaska" issues, and I needed to move, go
down. That’s what I did. I could be with the whales XE "whales" again.
There’s a common theme there.

Hardy: You say you felt drawn to Hawaii XE "Hawaii" .

Anderson: I had gone there for a visit, and I said, “Well, this is
nice.” I had been in Alaska XE "Alaska" for seven years. I know I like
warm weather. I saw possibilities and chances and experience. I think a
lot of it is just experience.

Hardy: So what happens next?

Anderson: I had been there for a while, and I finally got a job on a
catamaran and did that for — I don’t know. What does my résumé say?

Hardy: I think two years again.

Anderson: Yes, it’s about that.

Hardy: We’ve got you from ’80 to ’81, first mate, whale narrating,
Seabird Cruises XE "Seabird Cruises" , Hawaii XE "Hawaii" .

Anderson: Yes. Good old Seabird Cruises. We ended up running up on a
reef during a gale. I had been in Hawaii XE "Hawaii" , and I was getting
island-itis. I had been there and I said, “Okay, this is great, but I’m
disconnected from activism. I’m disconnected from a lot of things out
here.” Like I said, we used to take everything from dinner cruises to
whale watches, as you would expect a catamaran to do. It was a great
sailing vessel as well. It was a really good experience.

They had a group of teachers we picked up. We got up before dawn and
went to the boat in Lahaina XE "Hawaii:Lahaina" Harbor. Then we went
over to Lanai to an unmarked harbor over there, a cut in the reef, no
lights, no nothing. We picked up a group of teachers that are off on
some sort of retreat in a large group. We’re talking 50, 60 people. I
don’t know what they’re doing on Lanai, but they were doing something.
Maybe it was a seminar or something. We were going to take them to
Lahaina XE "Hawaii:Lahaina" for the day for shopping and then bring them
back.

Well, between the islands the water can get pretty rough as it is, but
there was a storm moving in. For some reason, during that trip the water
was really rough. We’d feed them these kind of greasy sweet rolls and
pastries and coffee. You had never seen so many people get sick in your
life. I won’t go into details, but it was a real rough trip on them and
us. It was very rough coming back. It was like a washing machine. That
convinced a number of them to not take the boat back to the island. When
you get to Lahaina XE "Hawaii:Lahaina" , it’s in lee of the island and
it’s warm and sunny and pleasant. We’re hosing the puke down off the
boat and got it cleaned up. But about half the people decided to fly
back.

So we made our way out of Lahaina XE "Hawaii:Lahaina" Harbor, and the
owner of the company was at the helm. We headed back. This is a
several-hour trip. Later in the day, the waves had really risen. There
were really gale-force winds, I suppose, but it was honking out there.
There were so many white waves that the captain of the boat, the owner,
couldn’t see the channel. It was unmarked, so he went where he thought
it was, and he ran up right on a reef. It was pretty amazing. I was with
an experienced crew and some that were far more experienced than me. But
we had everybody in lifejackets in no time at all. Fortunately we hit a
part of the reef where the fresh spring water came up and it softened
the coral. It poked a few holes in the boat, but we also rested on the
reef as the waves hit the boat. We only had one hysterical woman — only
one. She was just kind of beside herself, and a lot of worried men, too.
They were like, “What do we do? What do we do?” So we had everybody sit
down.

It ended up we ripped the chairs off the deck, and as night fell, a
Coast Guard XE "U.S. Coast Guard" helicopter came out and plucked
passengers off one by one in a basket. So it was quite a scene.
\[Laughter\]. The rest of us stayed on the boat, trying to keep the
pumps going and stuff like that until daylight, which we did. Then I was
asked to go down this very narrow passageway and disconnect the rudders,
which were stuck in the coral. The boat was bouncing around a lot.
During this time, I was in this very tight compartment like this. The
wave hit just as I’m unloosening a bolt, and of course, I just lost the
very tip of a finger — nothing tragic. But the short story of that is
that I didn’t have any workmen’s comp insurance. My owner forgot to pay
it. So I got some money from that, and then I used that to leave Hawaii
XE "Hawaii" . I haven’t lived there since.

Hardy: And then?

Anderson: From Hawaii XE "Hawaii" —

Hardy: On the résumé we’ve got you ending up back at Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace" USA.

Anderson: Yes. I started working at Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace:New
England office" in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" , the New England
office, doing campaigns. I was working in the office and the Rainbow
Warrior XE "Rainbow Warrior \[vessel\]" , the flagship, was there. I
actually had gone up to Maine XE "Maine" where new engines were being
put in. I started working on the boat there rehabbing the boat for
campaigns. So I worked on the boat for a while. It was planning
campaigns and just doing a lot of the paperwork and preparation for
campaigns, besides doing the grunt work and putting insulation on engine
room pipes and things like that.

I went XE "demonstrations and protests" \\r "demo1" XE "seals" \\r
"demo1" XE "hunting" \\r "demo1" XE "sabotage" \\r "demo1" up into the
sea ice for one of the harp seal hunts. We pulled into a port, and they
weren’t going to go do a confrontation. They weren’t going to do a thing
on the ice. I had in my own mind my own plan. So I left the boat up
there and traveled up into St. John’s XE "Canada:St. John's" ,
Newfoundland XE "Canada:Newfoundland" and over time made my way to the
blessing of the fleet, where I held up a sign opposing the seal hunt.

Hardy: To the blessing of the fleet?

Anderson: Yes. Before they send the sealers out, they have the blessing
of the fleet. I had my sign up there and it almost started a riot. I was
taken into custody. I had some designs as well about taking an old ship
that was in the harbor and helping it drift towards the entrance to the
harbor and blocking it, but I never followed through because of
security. So I did that for a while.

Hardy: You’re by yourself.

Anderson: Yes. A common theme here, isn’t there?

Hardy: What are you doing here? You’re going up on the Rainbow Warrior
XE "Rainbow Warrior \[vessel\]" , and this is at the point — I’m
assuming that this is the point where the Rainbow Warrior by the early
80s already has a lot of celebrity.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: You’re going on not the first great intervention but another
intervention, and you’re disappointed that —

Anderson: They were unsure about what they were going to do. I think
Paul Watson XE "Watson, Paul" was up fooling around with Jell-O and
pudding from cannons or some bizarre tactics. But I had decided that
there was something about the vessel was not going to be used in a way
that was going to go out and save seals. I just had plotted in my own
mind a certain course of action, and I had gone up there to do that.

Hardy: So you jumped ship?

Anderson: Well, yes. I left.

Hardy: Did you tell people you were leaving? They knew where you were
going?

Anderson: Not really. Again, a lot of this is fairly fuzzy in my mind,
because I know I was with the ship on a return voyage. But I had gone up
and done some work. \[I\] went to Prince Edward Island XE "Canada:Prince
Edward Island" afterwards with photographs I had taken, and they
disappeared at the one-hour photo place. “We can’t find them,” sort of
thing. But, yes, I had gone up and went to St. John’s XE "Canada:St.
John's" by myself and checked and scouted everything out to try to see
if there was anything I could do to sabotage the seal hunt. Of course,
there I was again, Mr. Naïve, logistics and everything else. There were
things I could have done which may or may not have had an effect, but
the things I was looking at to do were mysteriously all suddenly lit up
and fortified with guards and things.

Hardy: What did you expect to happen XE "psychological aspects" \\r
"psy5" ?

Anderson: I don’t know. I was just going to do something. I was looking
for opportunity. I had preparations. I had a wetsuit with me and things.
I was looking to see what effect and look for opportunities to try and
stop this god-awful massacre out there without hurting people.

Hardy: By this point, too, you weren’t the first to do this sort of
thing.

Anderson: I don’t know.

Hardy: In your own — had you heard stories of other guys who had sort of
gone off on their own?

Anderson: No.

Hardy: There had been the beatings of Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" ?

Anderson: Yes. Paul Watson XE "Watson, Paul" had done a lot of things up
there. I don’t think I was inspired by them.

Hardy: But some guys had already —

Anderson: People had been beaten. Dave McTaggart XE "McTaggart, Dave" ,
when we sailed into the nuclear zone in French Polynesia XE "French
Polynesia" , had gotten whacked over the head. I guess that’s sort of
normal. You accepted that as part of what was going on. I remember being
frustrated. I put a lot of work into the Rainbow Warrior, and it was
sort of like milling around, so to speak.

So I went up there and didn’t accomplish an awful lot except to get some
national coverage on Canadian TV with a sign.

Hardy: So you did get some coverage.

Anderson: Yes XE "law enforcement agents" \\r "law1" . But the police
came, the RCMP \[Royal Canadian Mounted Police\] came, to pick me up for
my own safety. Someone was yelling to me, “Well, you eat chicken, don’t
you?” and that sort of thing. Then the crowd started coming in. The RCMP
—

Hardy: You can say, “No, I don’t eat chicken.”

Anderson: Yes, I did, but I don’t think I had a chance to say much of
anything because the crowd started coming and the RCMP pushed their way
through and grabbed me and pulled me away.

Hardy: This really intrigues me, because you’re going up there alone.
You know that guys have already been messed over and that you’re
probably going to get arrested.

Anderson: Maybe I thought I could get away with it though as well.

Hardy: You thought you could get away with it? How were you going to get
away with it?

Anderson: I’m willing to — part of it is I trust people to be rational
in some situations. In public situations there’s a certain amount of
safety. I probably thought or was aware that the RCMP were around. I
don’t know if they could get to me in time. But you go in with some
measured risk in all of these things. That’s just the way I thought.
It’s been so long, I’m not sure what was going through my head. I had a
room in this rooming house that I had rented, and I was walking and just
going out and doing. Mind you, from where I sit now, I think I could
have accomplished perhaps a lot more had I been more resolved in working
with an organization and worked my way through it.

Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" was pretty unstable XE "funding/finance" . In
those days XE "environmental issues/environmental movement" , working
for nonprofits was a different proposition. And for a lot of them,
especially environmental groups, because they were so unstable, you
never could count on funds. You never could count on a campaign being
funded for more than a season. You didn’t have health and life insurance
and any kind of medical support. You were just there. I think you just
get accustomed to doing things a certain way, and I think perhaps it
wasn’t the smartest way to do things.

Hardy: Any contingency plans? Did you tell people where you were? Did
you have some phone numbers on you?

Anderson: I don’t think so. I don’t recall but I may have. I don’t think
so. It wasn’t that sort of thing. I just went and did it.

Hardy: So they arrest you.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: For your own protection.

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: And they throw you in jail.

Anderson: No.

Hardy: They didn’t throw you in jail?

Anderson: Oh, no.

Hardy: So what happened?

Anderson: They let me go. They took me quite a ways away and said,
“Where are you staying? Stay here. Don’t go out. Stay away from this
stuff.” “Okay, thank you.”

Hardy: Then you left St. John’s XE "Canada:St. John's" .

Anderson: Yes. I think within a day or so I said, “Well, I can’t do what
I came to do,” and I went back down and got on the boat. I don’t think
anybody really — no, I went to Prince Edward Island XE "Canada:Prince
Edward Island" , because I had taken photographs. I’d walk around taking
pictures of sealing vessels. Mind you, as we’re speaking, I remember a
year or two before people had chained themselves to sealing boats at
this same event. So there was some precedence there. I talked to people
about that. There’s such a gap between cultures and experiences that
they were just offended anybody would have the gall to come up on their
vessels with their tradition and chain themselves. It was seen as a very
arrogant thing to do.

Hardy: So when you got back what did the folks back at Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace:New England office" think? They pat you on the back?

Anderson: I don’t think — no, no. I don’t think I had said much to
anybody. I don’t remember too much, but I didn’t let things get out that
much.

Hardy: You didn’t want to tell the story?

Anderson: I’m trying to remember if this is one or two experiences, if
there was one time on the boat in which I got off and got back on or if
I had joined them up in some other place. I’m having a hard time
discerning that right now.

Hardy: Were there other guys doing the same sort of thing, going off by
themselves?

Anderson: Only people like Paul Watson XE "Watson, Paul" who had the
common sense to form an organization and get money for doing this sort
of thing.

Hardy: That reminds me, have you read Rik Scarce XE "Scarce, Rik" ’s
Eco-Warriors XE "Eco-Warriors \[book\]" ?

Anderson: A long time ago.

Hardy: I remember reading that, and he talked about — there was one
chapter to the guy who went to Iceland XE "Iceland" .

Anderson: That wasn’t me.

Hardy: But XE "whales" \\r "whale4" XE "hunting" \\r "whale4" XE
"sabotage" \\r "whale4" he was just \[unclear\]. I assign it with my
students, because they \[ask\], “What can we do? There’s no person can
make a difference. We’re up against these” — and it’s this one guy from
somewhere in the Midwest, went to high school, he joins up with Sea
Shepherd XE "Sea Shepherd Society" Society, I think. Then he goes off to
Iceland XE "Iceland" by himself, maybe with one other guy. They get a
job in a restaurant. Then by themselves they go and they go up to the
Icelandic scientific \[center\] where basically they’re keeping all the
whaling records. They ransack the place. They smash the computers. They
come back to the harbor, and then they scuttle the two whaling ships.
Then they barely get off the island.

They go to England XE "Great Britain" . Then they say, “Hey, we did it.
Arrest us. Come take us back and try us.” Iceland XE "Iceland" said,
“Did what? Nothing happened here. What are you talking about?” “Oh, yes.
We scuttled your ships. We destroyed your station,” because they wanted
this to be a big public event.

I think what happened in the aftermath was it broke out in the press,
and the Icelandic public, which before then \[said\], “Whaling — this is
our heritage. This is who we are as a people.” Then they changed the
laws. So these two kids, with no support, no form, just they had a real
impact. I love that chapter and that story.

Anderson: I think XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psy6" a lot of it is
you have to believe that there’s a chance that you’ll make a difference,
even if you don’t have an organization behind you. It might be out of
desperation. It might be out of “I’m not smart enough to think of
anything else to do right now, how to approach this.” But they call it
direct action, and that’s what you do. You just go up and you take
thoughtful but perhaps desperate moves, and you try the unexpected, the
untried. You just try it.

Hardy: Had you done this before, anything equivalent?

Anderson: No, not that I can recall.

Hardy: So you must have been at your wit’s end.

Anderson: Yes XE "media" \\r "media1" XE "seals" \\r "media1" XE
"hunting" \\r "media1" . I was disappointed again. But I felt I had done
some good in that there was some media, some opposition. There was a
statement made there, and it was reported that there was somebody there
with a sign. That was important. There were years when Greenpeace XE
"Greenpeace" didn’t act on some issues and Sea Shepherd XE "Sea Shepherd
Society" did. I was grateful for that even though people had opinions
about some of Sea Shepherd’s tactics and approaches.

Hardy: When you get back again, you didn’t tell folks or you did tell
folks?

Anderson: I remember going back through Prince Edward Island XE
"Canada:Prince Edward Island" . The weather was suddenly beautiful.
Going into a photo developing store. I remember the — I’m trying to
recall. I never had to recite this before. I had spent some time. There
was a meeting in Prince Edward Island XE "Canada:Prince Edward Island" .
I remember Peter Dykstra XE "Dykstra, Peter" , who was a media
representative, was there and some other people, far away from the hunt.
They had tried to hire helicopters to get out to the seals, but the
government had cracked down. Again, I’m not sure if this is the very
same year, but I think it was. \[I\] stayed in a hotel. There was a big
snow mound in front. There was some — not a prime minister but some
political person from Canada XE "Canada" who was opposing the hunt. The
media was there, that sort of thing. I was assisting Peter in some ways
— logistics and phones and things like that. I do remember there was one
media shot of somebody posing, being really sad or upset about the seals
XE "seals" being killed. It was staged in a parking lot with this big
mound of snow behind it, because they couldn’t get out to the ice to do
it.

I got back on the ship and I remember we went down through some really
rough weather. We hit some real waves. I remember the radios fell off
the shelves. I was at the wheel at the time, because we took turns. Just
follow the compass — it didn’t take a lot. I wasn’t navigating. But made
our way back into Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" .

Then there was another campaign XE "demonstrations and protests" on that
vessel. The National Lead Company XE "National Lead Company" was dumping
titanium dioxide off the coast XE "environmental issues/environmental
movement" . It’s a white-colored pigment used in toothpaste and other
industrial things XE "business corporations" . We chained ourselves to a
huge anchor of one of their dump ships out there, and the Coast Guard XE
"U.S. Coast Guard" came over and cut us off and shook their fingers at
us. But during that time, National Lead Company XE "National Lead
Company" , who owned the titanium dumping company, had sent somebody
down to talk to us as we were scoping out their base of operations. They
had gotten pretty tough with us because we had tied signs on their
barge. One guy was kicking me, and fortunately I had a hardhat on. But
we were talking casually with this person. He turned out to be an
attorney and he took us to court and that sort of thing. We had
hearings. I forget how that turned out.

After that XE "gay community" \\r "gay1" , the campaigning part, the
entrepreneur in me suddenly came up. I had gone to Provincetown XE
"Massachusetts:Provincetown" with my girlfriend, who was from Alaska XE
"Alaska" and I had known her for a long time. We had known each other
for a long time and had talked about marriage. I was a bit scared about
that, because I was realizing or had realized by then I was probably
gay. I said, “Oh.” So that sort of made me say, “Okay, which way am I
going to go on this?” I had a pretty good idea before then, but that’s
another whole story.

We took a road trip and went to Provincetown XE
"Massachusetts:Provincetown" , Massachusetts, which the reader should
know is a popular gay destination for tourists. I had gone there,
decided not to get married, I really was gay, and opened a retail store
for Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" . Can you imagine that? It was a seasonal
store. I said, “You need to fund-raise. I need to settle down a little
bit. I need to stop moving around and doing all these different things.”
So I got the Greenpeace New England office XE "Greenpeace:New England
office" to say, “Okay. We’ll make this kind of a campaign. We’ll do it
for fundraising.” We did that for a couple of years.

Hardy: What’s this now? So the store is —

Anderson: Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" . It’s Greenpeace merchandise.

Hardy: It’s a Greenpeace merchandising store in Provincetown XE
"Massachusetts:Provincetown" . What street?

Anderson: Commercial Street. What would it be next to? It was right in
the center of town. I also started bringing in other products from other
companies that had that same sort of wildlife theme. \[recording
interruption\].

Hardy: This is quite a yarn.

Anderson: I know. I’ll have to come to the end of it pretty quick
because I’m going to run out of steam. I don’t do this much talking in
one sitting very often.

Hardy: Whenever you want to stop, but I’ll keep you going as long as you
talk.

Lee: Charlie, you realize you are interviewing a real activist
\[unclear\].

Hardy: Hell, yes.

Lee: As opposed to Tom \[Regan XE "Regan, Tom" \] and Peter \[Singer XE
"Singer, Peter" \], who can yak, yak, yak. \[Laughter\].

Hardy: They got out of their offices. They did some real action.

Lee: That’s right. True. Tom did sit-ins and all that. But for them, the
impact is writing.

Hardy: It is.

Lee: But this is real. \[recording interruption\].

Anderson: There XE "hunting" \\r "hunt2" XE "Native Americans" \\r
"hunt2" XE "environmental issues/environmental movement" \\r "hunt2" XE
"whales" \\r "hunt2" are so many things that pop up into my mind. I’m
just amazed at what’s coming out. On the North Slope, one of the images
I have in my mind after taking a break from here was visiting Kaktovik
XE "Alaska:Kaktovik" or Nuiqsut XE "Alaska:Nuiqsut" , going up there to
talk to them about their position on offshore drilling. They were given
part of the percentage of this one well on an island that was just
offshore from their village. So they were compromising. I said, “How can
you support this when you also say that it hurts everything up here, the
wildlife?” He says, “Well, it’s very difficult. I represent my people. I
wear two hats. I take one hat off and put the other one on, and take one
off and put the other hat on.”

This is in the context of sitting in a brand new mobile home. We’re up
in the Arctic on the edge of the Arctic Ocean on permafrost, and it’s a
brand new mobile home, as you would expect, furniture. Then next to the
washer and dryer is this big old head of a caribou lying on the floor.
Then walking over and looking into the permafrost that was open and
seeing that they had a permafrost freezer there, and you could see whale
meat down there. I walked around the village and I could see whale meat
sort of scattered around and rotting in the sun at the same time. It was
quite a mixture of emotions — of respect and dismay at the same time.
Where were we?

Hardy: We got you back from Prince Edward Island XE "Canada:Prince
Edward Island" and St. John’s XE "Canada:St. John's" and you talked
about chaining yourself to the anchors of —

Anderson: Of a dumping vessel, yes. We were told later —

Hardy: Of a dumping vessel. Whose idea was this?

Anderson: Gosh. We were on the Rainbow Warrior XE "Rainbow Warrior
\[vessel\]" and we thought of it XE "demonstrations and protests" . It’s
a pretty trite thing to chain yourself to something. But we got really
cold that night. We didn’t tell the Coast Guard XE "U.S. Coast Guard" ,
but XE "law enforcement agents" we were afraid that they might let out
the anchor — and these links of this anchor were this big. But we got
cold, and we didn’t really lock the handcuffs because we were afraid if
that chain was let go, we’d all be killed by drowning. As soon as the
Coast Guard came up, we cinched the handcuffs on. Then we were later
told that had the chain slipped, which it oftentimes does, we would have
been hurt.

But eventually I wound up doing retail for Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" in
Provincetown XE "Massachusetts:Provincetown" . I did that. That was
seasonal. I don’t remember what I did during the winters. I settled in
in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" and got a job as a barback. You
clean up glasses and dishes and stuff. I did various things for money
and I also worked for Greenpeace, and then I did the seasonal stores for
them.

Eventually XE "business corporations" \\r "bus1" that led into my doing
my own stores. I did one in Provincetown XE "Massachusetts:Provincetown"
after opening the first one in Lahaina XE "Hawaii:Lahaina" . I went back
to Hawaii XE "Hawaii" . I cycled through. I knew Lahaina and whale
watching. It was an entirely whale-themed store. It was done with my
first long-term male partner. Paul \[Derdzinski XE "Derdzinski, Paul
\[former partner\]" \] and I opened Ecology House XE "Ecology House" .
We ended up opening another one in Provincetown XE
"Massachusetts:Provincetown" , a seasonal one, called Ecology House. The
one after that was in Portland, Maine XE "Maine:Portland" , down on
Exchange Street. At that point, we decided to do not just whale themes
XE "whales" but all terrestrial animals. It was a fur-free zone, no
animal products in the store. And there was a message. We tried to be
subversive in the retail setting. You walk in to a store hearing
beautiful New Age type music, ethereal music, to make you feel good and
have a good experience and to see all these wonderful images of critters
around. We had an information board as well.

Then we were approached by people who wanted to open stores like ours,
so we set up a franchise company. We sold a franchise store in Boulder,
Colorado XE "Colorado:Boulder" , one at the Portland XE
"Oregon:Portland" mall not far from us. What we would do, we’d start
setting the stores up and then turning them into franchises as we got
them going. Our last and largest store was here in Portland, Oregon,
right down near the shopping center downtown.

In this, my oral history, we are now in the midst of Gulf War I
(1990-91). President \[George H. W.\] Bush XE "Bush, George H. W." has
us enmeshed in a war that, like today, set off all kinds of things in
the economy. A lot of big companies went down in 1990-91. We had opened
the year before. Every one of our stores had met conservative
projections, but we lost the store in Portland as the economy tanked.
After eight years in business, Ecology House XE "Ecology House" just
fell apart. Our franchisees said, “Well, we don’t need you anymore.”

So I stayed here in Portland XE "Oregon:Portland" after Ecology House
closed and got my degree in business management and communication at
Concordia XE "Concordia College" after having lived in Portland for a
number of years. I was starting over in a lot of ways. At that point, I
found a job position at the Progressive Animal Welfare Society XE
"Progressive Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" \[PAWS\] up in Lynnwood,
Washington XE "Washington:Lynnwood" , in their advocacy department. Just
as Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" had become my first structured
organization to put my energies and beliefs to work, the Progressive
Animal Welfare Society did the same thing there. Mitchell Fox XE "Fox,
Mitchell" was my boss, and I learned a lot from him. I learned about
media. That’s where I did have a mentor. The issues there really
expanded my understanding of animal issues.

While I was at the Ecology House XE "Ecology House" in Portland, Maine
XE "Maine:Portland" , in the 1980s, I met Ken Shapiro XE "Shapiro,
Kenneth" , now with the Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals XE "Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PsyETA)"
— it has a new name, which I don’t recall right now. He and I and Linn
Pulis XE "Pulis, Linn" and a bunch of other folks set up the Maine
Animal Coalition XE "Maine Animal Coalition" . We held the first meeting
in our store, actually. The Maine Animal Coalition exists to this day.
They have a web site, so it’s great to see. We did that.

During that time, since I had my own business, I had an income — hurrah!
I was able to also continue on my work, and so I investigated places
like Bowdoin XE "Bowdoin College" College, not far from Portland XE
"Maine:Portland" , Maine. In the church basement, they have animal labs.

Hardy: Where is this?

Anderson: Just north of Portland. I don’t remember the town \[Brunswick
XE "Maine:Brunswick" \]. The college is Bowdoin XE "Bowdoin College" . I
would go into their basement to look for unlocked doors. I wanted to see
what was going on, because they had all these animal cages XE "animal
experimentation and testing" . It was so sad; it was the basement of a
church. I never did see animals per se down there, but I saw for my
first time — it made an impression on me — the stereotaxic devices, in
which you take an animal, place it and set screws, not into the skull
but in such a way that the animal couldn’t move his head or body. They
were studying the development of the neural networks for vision of young
ferrets. These animals would be set in there. I read some of the papers.
They would just sit there unable to move.

I also went up to the Decoster egg-laying factory, which is a huge farm
XE "factory farms" , producing countless eggs XE "chickens" . My first
experience with a commercial egg-laying operation — tens of thousands of
hens in these buildings. They had old buildings and new buildings. The
din of chickens stuffed four or five and six to a small cage, and
looking at them and seeing all the sores — the sores on their feet, and
watching the eggs roll down. I’m lucky. It’s easy for me to be a
vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" , and I’m pretty much a vegan now, because
of that reinforcement. I suppose it’s sort of like being a priest with a
collar. You had the identity. People support you being holy. It’s the
same way. You get all these reinforcing experiences. Our license plate
number was taken. We were warned never to come there again. But we took
video footage of this disgraceful business and pictures as well XE
"chickens" .

Hardy: What motivated you to do this?

Anderson: My mission, continuing on to get information and feeding it to
the Maine Animal Coalition XE "Maine Animal Coalition" . Again, we’re
back in Maine XE "Maine:Portland" , Portland, Maine, where I still had a
store there, which allowed me a lot of freedom to go around on my own
and do things.

Then XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp4" there’s a thing called oxen
XE "oxen" pulling in which it was a tradition to have oxen pull heavy
sleds of concrete in competition at state fairs. They are just beating
the hell out of these animals, welts rising up everywhere and across the
face. That was a good campaign. I felt very good about it. We got a lot
of reforms done. I haven’t checked back lately what the status is, but
we brought it to their attention in the legislature. I was still very,
very unskilled in the political process and getting bills through.

I learned several skills at PAWS XE "Progressive Animal Welfare Society
(PAWS)" (the Progressive Animal Welfare Society). I was with the
advocacy department, working on everything from the Omak \[Washington XE
"Washington:Omak" \] suicide races XE "horse racing" , which is where a
bunch of folks gallop at full speed off a very steep incline down
through a river and up into a rodeo arena, a very short race, usually
less than a minute or two. Unfortunately, when one horse falls in this
pack of horses, the other ones fall over the first. They killed three
horses in the first year I was there — broken bones. The third horse
collapsed in the arena. Omak suicide race.

The sea lions XE "sea lions" at Ballard Locks was another PAWS campaign.
There was a government task force XE "politics" . The federal government
appointed a task force of twenty-one people. Mitchell XE "Fox, Mitchell"
Fox, the PAWS advocacy director, got me onto this task force XE
"science/scientific community" . We worked with Dr. Toni Frohoff XE
"Frohoff, Toni" , who now works for HSUS \[The Humane Society of the
United States XE "Humane Society of the United States (HSUS)" \]. But
there were three or four of us activist types on this panel. I was, I
think, one — I think I was only one of a few people in there without a
Ph.D. We’re talking all the regional directors of National Fisheries
Service and things like that.

But it was a great campaign, in that sea lions were being blamed for
decimation of steel head salmon XE "salmon" , a specific population from
the Cedar River. There was no doubt they had an impact, but what the
solution of the National Marine Fisheries Service, the tribes, and
others was, and the foregone conclusion that we were supposed to come
to, was you kill the sea lions XE "sea lions" and the problem goes away.
Well, we did diligent research. Dr. Sam Wasser XE "Wasser, Sam" , who
teaches at the University of Washington, was also instrumental. He was
in the news today actually for his sampling of the elephant ivory DNA
analysis, a DNA expert. We examined and did the research and gave the
Corps of Engineers XE "U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" a run for its
money, because the way the Ballard Locks and the fish ladder, which was
supposed to allow these fish to go through, was so poorly designed. The
Corps was responsible for its creation. We fought and we fought. We had
half of the scientists XE "science/scientific community" in that room on
our side eventually, and we got a lot of changes. They enacted the
changes, but it was a long, uphill battle XE "politics" .

The religious practice of kosher slaughter XE "slaughtering animals" has
an equivalent of sorts in the Muslim XE "religion:Islam" community.
Their ritual slaughter, however, doesn’t have a specified, at least in
the communities here, person that is well trained in killing animals. So
the ritual slaughters here in Washington XE "Washington" state were done
by going down and picking out an animal, and they’re done at a facility
just on a concrete pad. That facility was shut down on occasion. I
worked on that issue as well. Issue after issue like that.

In a related effort, I was able to get hidden cameras from PETA XE
"People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" and put them in a
backpack XE "farm animals" , much like the one I have in town now, to go
into the auction houses for cattle XE "cows" and spent dairy cows. If
you think dairy doesn’t have an impact on animals, go to an animal
auction in which these cows are just skin and bones and the calcium is
eaten out of their bodies so you can have it in yours. I was able to get
in the back where they were castrating without anesthesia and dehorning
the animals, doing these types of undercover investigations.

Lobbying in Olympia in Washington XE "Washington:Olympia" state XE "laws
and legislation" . I got lucky my first year. I found the racehorse
industry to be very favorably inclined to stop greyhound XE "greyhound
racing" racing from starting here. So with that fluke, I was able my
first year to get a bill through that prohibits greyhound racing
preemptively from Washington state. Most of my lobbying in Olympia was
to stop bad bills coming from the University of Washington XE
"University of Washington" and various other interests in the state that
were trying to weaken animal welfare laws established before I got on
board.

Hardy: We’re up.

\[End Disk 2; Begin Disk 3 of 4\]

Hardy: We’re up and running again, tape 3, September 30th.

Anderson: Who would have believed it?

Hardy: So you’re sort of doing us a quick run-through just so that we
got the lay of the land. We’re running through some of the numerous
campaigns.

Anderson: Working XE "media" \\r "media2" XE "public relations/outreach"
\\r "media2" for the Progressive Animal Welfare Society XE "Progressive
Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" really expanded the depth of my awareness
of all the facets of animals. I had a general idea of what I heard about
ritual slaughter. I had a general idea about horse racing and horse
tracks. But when I started working on these things, I only wish there
was a way to convey that to other people, to get that same experience
and knowledge, but you can’t because you’re in competition all the time
with all these other messages, more so today than years and years ago.
There is so much information. People are filtering a lot more out. So
working with the Progressive Animal Welfare Society XE "Progressive
Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" — I worked with them for eight years. I
enjoyed just about every bit of it. The types of issues drove me to the
conclusion that I had to really go deep. I had to really know my subject
on it very well, and that was my specialty. I always took more time and
effort to get into it than my boss wanted me to. “Are you still working
on that? You should do this.”

But during that time he also taught me a lot about strategy, how to go
against corporate sponsors, and especially the media. I still don’t even
come close to how he managed media messages. He was a professional at
that. I oftentimes had conflicts with media messaging because the issue
seemed to be more spin.

Oftentimes the media, from experience, as I think people know now, they
don’t do justice to the other side. I would get upset sometimes when the
media would not really report out what the other side was saying and
what they were doing. It’s a shame, because when — like there was a
Pribilof XE "Alaska:Pribilof" seal hunt. I’m going back to Alaska again
when I was in Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" . Larry Murkulief XE
"Murkulief, Larry" , who was the head of the folks on XE "Alaska:Saint
Paul Island" Saint Paul Island — Larry Murkulief called me up one day
and said, “This is war.” I said, “What do you mean?” He quoted some
newspaper article where I was quoted, we were against the first seal
hunt in Alaska and all this, but the media thing was totally out of
context.

The fact that when one side’s statements are represented, I think it’s
really important for the media to understand how much unnecessary
conflict that creates between the two parties. What do any of us want in
the media but to have our point of view expressed? The media doesn’t
have to agree with it, but just to have it presented objectively,
factually as possible and as completely as possible. Whenever that is
taken out of context, when part of the story or emphasis — as oftentimes
happened when being interviewed because there would be leading questions
to get the most inflammatory statement out of you. It really impacts
social progress, because the old dictum, “First seek to understand, then
be understood,” is essential. That whole understanding of the other is
what I always have found to be essential for my work. I want to
understand how other people feel. I want to understand how they see
things. So I can have some empathy for them as well, to understand that
while taking the chance that my edge might be softened a bit. But at the
same time, I think it’s important for people to do that. When the media
doesn’t do that or they don’t communicate clearly what your position is,
it sets things back and causes all kinds of unnecessary waste and strife
and friction and, frankly, sometimes hate. I’m not sure where I was
going with that.

The campaigns at PAWS XE "Progressive Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)"
included also the Makah whaling hunt XE "whales" \\r "whale5" XE
"hunting" \\r "whale5" XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "whale5" XE "Native
Americans" \\r "whale5" XE "culture/tradition/customs" \\r "whale5" .
That seemed to tie everything together. The Makah, an indigenous tribe,
felt they had a historical right to go kill whales, in the interim only
for subsistence and ceremonial purposes, but they would not rule out
commercial whaling in later years. Five whales was the number chosen,
not for nutritional need but on the basis of the fact they had five
ancestral villages, one of which is Neah Bay XE "Washington:Neah Bay" .
It exists today in this general area. The whales they wanted to hunt
were gray whales, and those are the whales I had spent all my time with,
more than any other species of whale. So it was just sort of cosmic that
all these parts and pieces, those were part of my past, were now again
coming together.

So I got very enmeshed in that job and I ignored all my other tasks. I
was supposed to be director of advocacy at the time, and I ignored my
job as director. We got somebody’s boat as a protest platform. We were
on the water in the boat for a while, and then we got on some other
boats. That was interesting.

I’m going to spend a little time on it for a number of reasons. One,
different organizations, activists and organizations XE "animal rights
movement/animal protection community" , are different in their approach.
Some still reflect personalities an awful lot, and so it’s difficult
sometimes to form coalitions as animal activists when the tactics or the
nature of the people make it difficult to do things the way I would do
them, I suppose. One, you try to be respectful to the people that you’re
dealing with. Two, you try to be as factual as you can. And you’re
feeling an emotion and you’re stating a fact, go ahead and feel that.
But there’s a certain amount of respect, I think, that is due people
during social change. There was an awful lot of hatred, some racism from
the general public who supported what we were doing, which was very
disconcerting. And also acknowledgement that cultural differences have
to be recognized as existing, even though you want to oppose the hunt
and that’s not going to stop me from opposing the hunt.

So the first thing I did Neah Bay XE "Washington:Neah Bay" — there were
some other national organizations involved. They were giving me money
for me to be there. I spent money doing some research, becoming very
well informed on the issues. They had given money to the Progressive
Animal Welfare Society XE "Progressive Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" to
support the work I was doing, so that was great. It enhanced our budget
and allowed me to do videotaping of the village of Neah Bay XE
"Washington:Neah Bay" .

It’s actually a small town as you’d find anyplace else. It has tennis
courts, churches, a general store, post office, a daycare, a Head Start
school, a really nice facility, modern high school. Unemployment was
really high there. The first thing I did was try to dispel the image
that the media is putting out that there is this remote village steeped
in tradition and all the romanticized versions of this. So I videotaped
and documented the disparity in houses. Some people in the village were
very wealthy relative to the very poor. There was unemployment because
they were natural resource dependent. Fishing had gone bust. The fish
docks had crashed here. It was a natural resource-based economy, and
just like the timber industries, people were suffering job-wise. That
was an unavoidable fact, but it also helped set the context for what was
going on in the village.

The first thing I did — I had gone and done research, of course. Some of
the newspaper stories — there were some Makah elders who opposed the
hunt. I found the one, aka Binky, Alberta XE "Thompson, Alberta"
Thompson, who I admire to this day. People like me can go up to the
village, oppose, seek conflict, take chances, but I can leave. She lived
there. She lived there and opposed the hunt publicly. That takes
courage. A lot of other elders did too.

So I went to her and I said, “I’m here to understand. I’m here to see
what you would want me to do.” She said, “Well, the tribal council” —
and she went into the whole politics of the tribal council. She says,
“Help us get our message out.” I said, “What?” She said, “Get it
published, get it printed, whatever.” I said, “You write the message.”
She said, “English is our second language.” I said, “I can’t write it
for you. It has to come from you.”

So she and a couple of other elders sat around. They wrote it out. I
kept the original that they had sent me, and I added a few punctuation
points. She spoke perfect English, but I made a few punctuation points
but did not at all change and switch around words or tie in context or
anything. I was hands-off. It was just to make it look presentable. They
wanted it to represent them with proper English. We presented that and
it was printed in the nearby Port Angelles paper.

I went with her from elder to elder in Neah Bay XE "Washington:Neah Bay"
. I think it was nine of them who signed on to this letter, saying that
they opposed the whaling \[and\] they thought it was a bad idea. I don’t
have it with me. But as a white person looking in on this, it was such
an honor to listen and sit there while she talked to these elders. I
wasn’t the one saying, “You’ve got to sign this.” It was Binky, Alberta
XE "Thompson, Alberta" , explaining the letter. It would be part of a
larger conversation. They’d chat and go on and on. These people, many of
whom or most of whom are not alive now as we speak.

They were just saying that — my perspective as an outsider was that what
they were saying is that they were whalers, but you don’t become and
create the spiritual and subsistence connection by killing a whale. You
have to have that first before you do that, and it was reversed. You
can’t go there anymore. That’s my impression as a person. Even the
eldest, and she was a storyteller, she signed. She was weaving a basket
with whale images on it, and she was their eldest Makah.

To this day XE "Thompson, Alberta" , Binky — they went to the
International Whaling Commission XE "International Whaling Commission" .
I went with them the second time. I was their escort. She took a friend
so she’d have some company, and they went before the International
Whaling Commission and stood up to their village council representatives
who were there courtesy of the U.S. government. So we spent a lot of
time with the Makah whaling issue.

But XE "ethics and morality" \\r "ethic1" in the field, we had people of
all stripes. I came from a background of trying my best — a big
influence on me was Mahatma Gandhi XE "Gandhi, Mohandas" and his
principles of non-violence. Before all this and during, — I should
intersperse here with my trips to India XE "India" and things like that.
These were the influences of my worldview. You can oppose and be angry
and hate what a person does but understand that’s not the person;
they’re two different things. It’s really hard to do in practice and can
be impossible to do. I’ve failed a number of times.

But a lot of the groups in Neah Bay XE "Washington:Neah Bay" didn’t have
that. There were some younger protest folks who would respond to taunts
from, say, some Makah people on the dock who were just infuriated that
we were even in their nation. I’d be so embarrassed and I would just
duck and I’d hide under the seat in this power boat. Not everybody, of
course, other than myself was that way, but some of the groups. They
made it difficult at times.

The reverse of that — I organized an outreach meeting in Port Angeles XE
"Washington:Port Angeles" . Of course, the Makah showed up en masse to
oppose what we were saying. I was doing some moderating, and one of the
statements that was made by a Makah woman was the fact — she was an
elder who was for whaling. What she said essentially was that because of
her culture and the fact that she was Makah, genetically that means she
had a spiritual connection to animals and I did not. We have a
predisposition, rightfully so, to recognize the injustice of the
genocide in our history and treatment of Native Americans in this
country and the minorities around the world, how we’ve all treated one
another over time. But at the same time, that worked against us. It was
hard to oppose the Makah because that was their identity and whaling was
their rediscovered identity for their culture.

But as an animal activist, I believe — and as an environmentalist — I
believe that there are fundamental unifying principles that have to be
accepted regardless of culture. That’s where I’m at now and that’s what
I’m trying to do. Just as we do not accept child slavery, child labor,
we’re trying to make that universal. We try to eliminate female
mutilation, genital mutilation, which is done in west Africa and Sierra
Leone XE "Sierra Leone" where I was at. The right for people to
determine their own future, that sort of thing. I think there are
principles that environmental activists and animal activists have to
eventually agree upon. That’s what I’m working on now.

But to go back to the Progressive Animal Welfare Society XE "Progressive
Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" , I eventually left. I didn’t do a good
job during this campaign, as a director of the department, of managing
all these people I had hired. I had failed in that, and not relating to
the fact of there were people I had worked with in that department
before who didn’t need a lot of supervision, were given some goals and
objectives, and we checked in with them once in a while and you did what
you could to empower them. This was far different. I made mistakes in
hiring and also made mistakes in management. I left, but it was
tantamount to being forced out of that. That was really painful, very
painful.

That department was shrunk over time anyway. There was a conflict
between it and other missions of the Progressive Animal Welfare Society
XE "Progressive Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" . I won’t get into the
politics of that.

But XE "horses" \\r "horse1" XE "horse racing" \\r "horse1" XE "law
enforcement agents" \\r "horse1" when I left there, I cast about for
something to do. I did have some money left over, because one thing I
left out was during one of the Omak XE "Washington:Omak" suicide race
events, I would go there for three or four days at a time, and because I
had to be totally undercover, I just kind of yukked around during the
day. They used to have horse races during the daytime, but I’d sit out
there across the river with my video camera and document these races. In
the daytime, because it wasn’t safe to stay in town, I would go up into
the mountains into Conconully XE "Washington:Conconully" . There was a
campground up there, and it was cool anyway. I would hang out all day
and relax, and then I would come in at night and stay up late into night
and document these races.

Sometimes I’d be on the side of the race hill. They’d have a fence. I’d
climb down with a video camera to document the horses flying by and the
rocks flying and the horses going down. Well, one night a horse went
down while I was on the side of the hill. The other horses had gone
across the river, and this horse had gone down. Obviously the leg was
broken; the leg was going back.

They used to use tougher range ponies with sturdy legs. There are a lot
of quarter-horse type horses now in the race, and their legs are
thinner. They’re not made for running full speed down a steep hill.
Horsemanship is thrown out the window here for tradition XE
"Washington:Omak" .

So my job was to go down there and document this horse’s tragedy. They
turned the lights. So there were few remaining folks — most people
started going up the hill. I had gone further down the hill around the
edge of the fence and onto the race course. It was just a dirt hill.
They rode horses into this salmon-bearing river where the salmon
spawned. The downed horse was close to this river. I had my video camera
still on, and it was dark, and so I took a flash picture from maybe ten
or fifteen feet away, people around this horse. They had just put the
horse down with an injection. It had just collapsed on the ground and it
was dying or dead. I took this picture. Then, of course, that attracted
the attention.

Then I was approached by the sheriff’s department and other people.
“What are you doing here?” I said, “I’m just taking pictures of what’s
going on.” I was ordered off the hill. I was told to turn off my video
camera, which I didn’t do. I had jeans on, so I couldn’t get this
handheld camera in my pocket, and I had a hard time. So I was going up
the hill. You had to use one hand. It was so steep you had to use a hand
to grab this temporary fence to get up the hill, and I was alone by this
time.

I was maybe halfway up the hill and these two people — one a real big
guy and one — all you could see is kind of like moonlight, starlight —
one real big guy and one smaller person. “What are you doing here? What
are you doing with those pictures? Give us those cameras or we’re going
to beat the F out of you,” and all that sort of stuff. They made a grab
for me, and I rolled under that fence and I ran down to the police,
asking for help as I came down the hill. They were coming behind me, and
one of them fell and slid on his belly as I looked over my shoulder.
Fear makes a fast runner of me, so I got down there.

I got down there and I said, “I need help. I need police protection.
Some people are trying to assault me.” Then this deputy, who had told me
to get off the hill, said, “I thought I told you to get off the hill.” I
said, “I tried.” The next thing I know, his hands are around my throat
and he was choking me. He choked me to the ground. Other people twisted
my arm behind my back. I saw cowboy boots and there were civilians and
police around, county sheriffs. They twisted my arm. They said, “Let go
of the cameras.” I said, “They’re trying to take my property.” Then I
saw a white light because of the pain. I’m in the mud and my clothes
have been ripped up a bit. Both cameras went into the river, and I was
put under arrest. I spent the night in jail there all full of mud and
scrapes and bruises.

Some deputy went in and pulled the video camera out. The water had
jammed it so they couldn’t open it to take the tape out. It went to the
evidence room. Eventually I got an attorney. The charges were against me
for resisting arrest and all kinds of trumped up things. These deputies
filed false information and false statements. I finally went to an
attorney in Seattle XE "Washington:Seattle" over time, and she said,
“Well, you don’t have a case. You don’t have any witnesses.” I said,
“There’s a video camera, if there’s anything else.”

I took it to a crime lab, and sure enough, there was only audio on
there, but it backed up my story just enough. I sued the pants off of
them — the organizers of the race, the county sheriff’s department, the
county. It was arbitrated by a judge, and they just hated this. They
hated this because we were known every year for protesting the suicide
race. This time, it was me, and so I got a pretty good chunk.

I started XE "whales" \\r "whale6" XE "funding/finance" \\r "whale6" XE
"public relations/outreach" \\r "whale6" this story because after I left
PAWS XE "Progressive Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" I was still coasting
on some of this money. After that a friend recommended me for a campaign
regarding orca whales XE "whales" here. You have a real problem, for a
number of reasons. The southern resident orca whales in Puget Sound
declined over twenty percent in a several-year period. The primary
suspects are carcinogens from the toxic waste that was here historically
plus all the stuff we’re putting in now; a crash in food stocks, the
salmon they ate (these particular orcas fed on salmon); boat noise,
other acoustic devices; stress and disease.

I was hired by Earth Island Institute XE "Earth Island Institute" out of
San Francisco XE "California:San Francisco" to do a couple of things.
One of them was to do the research, get it into a web site which they
would set up, create documents, and get organizations here to work
together to solve the problem. I did all those things for about two
years until the funding ran out. We actually made the funding last a lot
longer. The donor, which powered this whole thing, just stopped giving.
We did that.

We organized a three-day conference of scientists, government, and NGOs
at the University of Washington XE "University of Washington" . Senator
Patty Murray XE "Murray, Patty" showed up. It was just a great turnout.
Participants received and gave lots of educating. We enabled many groups
to get together, had meetings, and tried to amplify the effectiveness of
the nonprofits. I was very happy with that. It was very successful.

But the money is gone. We had billboards all over the city. I don’t know
if you’ll see any more, but there were orca whales XE "whales" on them.
I was able to petition successfully a billboard company here to get a
million dollars’ worth of billboard advertising for just for the price
of printing. They went up for over a year. I still saw one up on Highway
99 recently. So public education and awareness was a large part of our
success.

My approach to helping orcas was that everybody has a responsibility —
so lifestyle choices, which remain a big part of what I do, my theme —
lifestyle choices are key. That’s where the power lies, and that’s where
the power lies — the diet, what we eat, changes the world. They’re all
tied together. I’ve been sort of — I look back and I’m just sort of
amazed how all these things tie into one another. It’s like a mosaic.
Piece by piece it comes together to where I am now.

So I still do volunteer work regarding the Makah whaling to a degree.
For the orca whale campaign, I still have my work there, but I don’t get
paid for that anymore.

I’m XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psy7" XE "environmental
issues/environmental movement" \\r "psy7" XE "animal rights
movement/animal protection community" \\r "psy7" now for the fourth year
a Realtor. I was doing it part-time while I had the Earth Island XE
"Earth Island Institute" job as well — but I’m a real estate agent. I’m
a Realtor \[with\] Coldwell Banker XE "Coldwell Banker" . I’m moderately
successful but not as much as I would like to be or should be. I think
it’s one of my other cycles. I’ve just been through my cycle in
non-nonprofit world where I’m not totally immersed. I’m not totally
surrounded by other people who think like me, and I’m not plugged into
the green organizations. Each time, this time in particular especially,
it’s valuable because I’m experiencing what the average person is
experiencing “out there.” I’m experiencing the overload of messages. For
the first time in a long time, in eight years, I am sitting there
saying, “This is how much of the message I hear from the animal welfare
community. This is how much I hear from the environmental community.
This is how much time I have as an opportunity to do anything. These are
how many opportunities I have to plug into this. This is how much effort
it takes to actually walk the talk without the constant reinforcement of
the images of the animals suffering, the knowledge of how the
environment is suffering.”

I don’t know anybody — and I’m fortunate enough to know people who are
at the head of the game. I don’t know anybody who is optimistic about
our environmental or animal welfare future. Nobody. Every time a law is
passed, it’s a compromise. The piece of the pie keeps getting smaller
and smaller. Every time you compromise, it’s smaller and smaller and
smaller.

What I’m hoping to do now is — and I’m not going to know if this is a
unique perspective or if it resonates with people unless I actually do
it, and I’ve put it off for years and years and years. Now perhaps
putting it on tape will also help me to continue what I’m doing. As I
alluded to earlier, I think there is a real, doable consensus on what
needs to be done. I’m not saying it’s the end-all answer. The analogy
I’m using in the things that I’m writing down — I’m trying to put this
in writing to see how it floats or if it sinks. The world doesn’t need
another organization so much as it needs agreement and consensus.
Consider a plant — if you take away air, if you take away soil, if you
take away light, if you take away water and nutrients — any one of those
things, the plant dies. I believe that if any one of several things
isn’t done, we have no future or we have a future we don’t want to see
in which very few of us have the ability to survive at the expense of
others and the political system that follows.

That’s what I’m trying to do now. I’m trying to pull all of what I’ve
talked about tonight together. As an introvert, you wouldn’t recognize
me thirty years ago. But perhaps the fact that I run off and do things
on my own is still a reflection of that. But I’ve been very fortunate,
and I’m hoping to continue to repay the gifts of life itself. I’ve
perhaps got one more chapter left in me. I’m hoping that it benefits
everybody and that it brings a more environmentally-sane and humane
future for everybody — people and other non-human animals. I’m hoping I
can somehow act as a catalyst to get other people to recognize and to
move everything forward.

I may not have a long time to live. I was diagnosed with cancer about
seven years ago. I’ve outlived my prognosis. I’m doing fine. Look at me,
I’m doing well, but I still test once a month. That immediacy hasn’t
really pushed — once the shock of it wore off — after I was still alive
after three years or so, well now I’m getting complacent and blasé about
the whole thing. But I don’t want to wait anymore. I think I really want
to stop talking about myself, as I’ve done tonight, because I just don’t
do that. This is unusual for me, but it’s an opportunity. Hopefully it
will be of use to some people.

The very fact that environmentalism came on the scene as a big awakening
in consciousness was integrated into the culture around the world, to
greater and lesser degrees is a sign of hope. Now we seem to be sort of
backpedaling on that a lot. I don’t know where that cycle is going to
come out. Animal welfare had its rising star for a while and got a lot
of media attention, mostly through publicity stunts. The fact that many
of the things that people said were unreasonable, such as what the
scientific community said about animal testing, are now reasonable.
People were saying, “It’s unreasonable. Science should be unfettered.
People will suffer.” Lo and behold, a lot of scientists also recognize
the fact that the truth is being said. And perhaps in a non-planned way,
a lot of the changes in animal care committees and using fewer animals,
refining techniques, replacing, finding replacement models — it’s here.
It’s been done. It is not nearly enough, but it provides for hope and
inspiration.

One of the things I’m trying to do is understand social change more so
perhaps I can anticipate it and act more effectively on how to get it
there. My degree in marketing helped a bit.

But the reason I brought the cancer in — it’s part of the animal
experimentation. I said, “Look at me. I am a perfect model. I am a whole
system. You guys are already saying that you can only do tissue and
cellular study levels \[and\] you don’t have whole systems to test
things. Here I am. You’ve got it all.” They just kind of looked at me
like I was nuts. I was seeing quite a few medical people at the time
because I was at a very advanced stage. I sort of gave up on that. At
the same time, I think that’s another opportunity. I wish I could have
made it another campaign.

Hardy: What kind of cancer?

Anderson: Prostate.

Hardy: So radiation therapy?

Anderson: Yes. It had gone into my lymph nodes and my PSA was high. They
said I probably had metastatic but microscopic disease. It wasn’t
showing up on the images on my bones, but I had a real high PSA, which
is a measurement, an indicator. I had two different types of radiation.
I had high-dose temporary iridium and then five weeks external beam.
Then I had a year of hormonal ablation, which means they took all the
testosterone out of my body. I got fat. I had no sex drive. Before that
I was scheduled for surgery to have the prostate removed until they
found it was in my lymph nodes. So I was prepared to not have a sex
drive and to live like a monk, and that was fine, but much of that has
been reversed.

Hardy: Did your personality completely change?

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: Did you ever listen to “This American Life”? Do you know “This
American Life”?

Anderson: Yes. NPR.

Hardy: Did you hear the program they did on the guys who talk about
having all their testosterone removed and what it was like?

Anderson: No.

Hardy: Then the women — a woman who had testosterone injections because,
in the process of becoming a man — you’ve got to hear this program.

Anderson: I’d love to. Was it recent?

Hardy: Yes. It was recent. It was in the last three months, and it was
wonderful.

Anderson: I can probably go on their website.

Hardy: You can get it off their website, because they talked about just
what it means to be a man or a woman and the total personality
transformations. You’ve got to listen to that.

Anderson: I’d really like to.

Hardy: It sounds like you went through it.

Anderson: Yes. I mean, I dealt with things on a far more emotional
level. There was a lot less — I didn’t have a sex drive at that point at
all. So having that warm, fuzzy-lovey feeling all the time without the
need to have the other part, the sex drive part of it, and to want to
touch and feel and feel the emotional thing — it was a blessing. It was
a real eye-opener. Perhaps every man should go through three months of
deprivation just so they can have more understanding and empathy for the
woman in the partnership. It was interesting.

Hardy: Did you change your diet when you had cancer? Did you go raw?

Anderson: No. I didn’t go raw.

Hardy: Did you consider it?

Anderson: No. I tried to get my fat down a bit, which I did for a while.
I had to because I wasn’t metabolizing much of anything without any
testosterone. On the other side of that, I now have to take testosterone
gel supplements, because it never recovered. If I dose it up a little
bit — I kicked the car when I first started doing it. I was adjusting
the dose. It was just amazing. It’s a little disappointing to see
yourself as a biochemical being. We grow up as a spiritual person and
this is who you are and you’re in full control and everybody around you
is really responsible for who they are. That’s not quite true. We are
given certain appetites and certain predispositions, and we all have our
crosses to bear — coming from the Judeo-Christian background. Yes. It’s
a little disappointing to say that, “Well, however this is figured in in
a spiritual reality, there’s certainly something else going on.” And how
you integrate the biochemical with the spiritual is very interesting.
I’d like to hear that program.

Hardy: You should absolutely hear. I should get it — this will remind me
to get it — because when I listened to it, it was just absolutely
amazing. And it was all about just — and I think you may be using some
of the same words in the program. Then the thing they did — because the
guys, they did their testosterone tests, both the men and the women, who
worked for “This American Life.” They brought in one guy from outside.
Of course, \[unclear\], none of the guys wanted to have the lowest
testosterone and none of the women wanted to have the highest. Then they
took bets. They did it on mic without knowing — “Well, I think it’s
this.” Then they get their results, and it was very funny. As I
remember, the woman they suspected had the highest did. And the guy who
had the highest testosterone wasn’t any of the men who worked in public
radio. It was a gay guy who, I think, contributes or was a friend or
somehow. So then they riffed on that. The whole thing was very, very
funny, but also very interesting, absolutely fascinating.

Anderson: The things that I’ve learned through all these experiences,
and all of us — when I sit here, I’m aware that every person has also an
incredible journey, one that we forget XE "psychological aspects" . You
lay in bed sometimes and all of a sudden a memory will float back. You
and I and everybody else have experienced so much. This oral history has
really helped pick that up to remember these things. I had — a lot of
this stuff I had completely forgotten about. I really had. So we all
have incredible histories. I guess what do we bring back from all of
that? What are the most important, deepest, and most essential parts of
ourselves that we want to choose out of our personal history? What parts
of our life do we think are the best? I’m hoping to do that right now.
That’s where I’m going next hopefully. Thank you.

Hardy: That sounds like a good place to end.

Anderson: That’s, I think, all I have, unless you have questions.

Hardy: Not tonight.

\[End Disk 3; End of Session\]

Will Anderson

Session \#2

October 1, 2004

Portland, Oregon

Charles Hardy, Interviewer

\[Begin Disk 4 of 4\]

Hardy: October 1st \[2004\], second interview with Will Anderson for XE
"ethics and morality" \\r "ethic2" XE "vegetarianism" \\r "ethic2" XE
"agriculture" \\r "ethic2" XE "environmental issues/environmental
movement" \\r "ethic2" the Recording Animal Advocacy project. Last night
I guess I was moving rather slowly at the beginning, so you took off to
make sure we got an overview. You raised a whole series of different
themes or issues that we could pursue. Why don’t we start with the role
that personal choices — actually, yes, let’s start with the issue of
diet and the relationship of that to your activities in both
environmental and animal rights movements. You said that you became a
vegetarian when you were a survival trainer for the air force XE "U.S.
Air Force" back in ’68 or ’69 after being required to kill a rabbit and
eat the eyeballs and that you really had no previous knowledge of
vegetarianism. Then the first book that gave you an inclination that you
could actually do this and live was Diet for a Small Planet XE "Diet for
a Small Planet \[book\]" . Carry us forward through there how your
thoughts and dietary habits and your thoughts about diet progressed.

Anderson: It’s pretty inescapable, the choices we make. We look for
solutions. If your experience creates your worldview, and your worldview
is such that when you walk down the street are you seeing
advertisements, are you seeing the animal connection, are you seeing the
environmental connection? If you see a commercial with an SUV driving
through a stream bed, you know what kind of message that comes out, and
you notice it and you take offense at it. You recognize it as a problem,
as an issue. If you’ve been into a factory egg-laying operation, you
know what it’s like. You know the number of birds that are stuffed into
one cage and the hellacious lives they lead. If you’ve seen in person or
in documentation a sow, a mother pig, who is restrained and can’t get up
so that her suckling pigs can nurse, but she can’t do anything to
control that nursing, you recognize that as a problem.

I think everybody has greater and lesser amounts of empathy. When you
see suffering or you see environmental damage, you see cause and effect.
Dietary choices and types of things we consume are cause and effect.
It’s not going to change until we take our personal responsibilities to
do that. It’s difficult in this world. Choices aren’t always there. When
I first became a vegetarian in the air force XE "U.S. Air Force" , I
didn’t really have any choices. One, I didn’t have the choice of
knowledge. It wasn’t there. Once that came along I was very fortunate to
start that. I owe a great deal of debt to all these people who took the
time to write things down.

So cause and effect, personal responsibility. We have a responsibility
in all areas of life. I think that people don’t recognize that the
biggest industry on the planet is agriculture, and the biggest part of
that industry is animal agriculture — all the food that goes into it and
all the energy and expenditures and human effort. What drives that is
our choice. What we choose to eat remains the biggest controllable
factor to solve the problem. Talk about empowerment. We want our power
back. Look at our plates, the choices we make in our food. I’m not
saying it’s easy for all people, but those habits and those acquired
tastes do change over time.

You have civil rights, human rights, genocide, animal rights. They’re
all about one exercising power over the powerless, and there’s no help
for those victims without intervention. Without change, it will go on
and on, and we’re responsible for it. So a lot of it is just being
responsible for things that are in our control.

Hardy: You began in the environmental movement, in particular with an
interest in whales XE "whales" . But at some point your interests
migrate over, expand to include factory farming and the treatment of
horses and the rest. How did that take place?

Anderson: I’m not certain how it took place. I think I had this innate
empathy for the underdog and for animals and for suffering XE
"psychological aspects" . I just saw it. When I lived in Chicago XE
"Illinois:Chicago" and a friend of mine and I went down to Lincoln Park
Lagoon, my friend threw in a hook and caught a fish. I must have been
nine or ten years old. My friend was very proud of that fish. I grabbed
it and threw it back. It’s that sort of thing throughout my life. I’ve
just felt the suffering and pain of others, both people and animals. I’m
not sure how it transitioned over. I think it was just a natural growth
that was always there.

Hardy: What about your introduction to the animal liberation or the
animal rights movement?

Anderson: Like most people XE "media" \\r "media3" , I got my
information through the media, because the things that come to the media
are sensationalistic. If you take any sort of event, newspapers are
going to find something to have a visual, or in the case of newsprint,
some sort of text that will stir you and make you buy papers and get you
all fired off to buy another paper to see what happens the next day. The
animal rights aspects of it, I think, like a lot of people, I had it
already within my own life. I was already a vegetarian. I was aware. I
just sort of accepted at face value the fact that people were simply
doing things about it. I think I was fortunate in that I saw the
connections between the environment and animal welfare. Stop eating meat
and, by golly, you really do have an impact on the environment. As a
matter of fact, I don’t believe the environment can be saved unless we
change the human ecology. The key factor there, one of them, is our
dietary choices. There’s not enough to go around. It’s not sustainable
to eat meat. We see it right now.

When I sit here with this cotton shirt, it has an impact — from the dyes
in it to the people who made it. It has an impact. It’s what I would
call a presence and consumer predation. I’m still a predator, but it’s
been transformed into my consumption patterns. Given there are six
billion people and growing on the planet, that has to change. We have to
figure out that we can’t continue this old image in our mind and this
paradigm in which we are hunter-gatherers. That’s dead. The
hunter-gatherer model has no future. It will take us nowhere. What we
have to do is recognize the things we need to do — population controls,
living within sustainable means, social and economic justice, and a
vegan diet. Take any of those three or four away, or however many you
want to add in there, and then the rest of it won’t matter. It will be
in vain. Every pillar must be able to support the future of
civilization.

Hardy: I want to see how you got from there to here. Again, in
particular shifting our focus from — we’re really sort of pretty
detailed, I guess, up until you left Greenpeace XE "Greenpeace" and you
started the Greenpeace oriented store in Provincetown XE
"Massachusetts:Provincetown" and then your move to Maine XE "Maine" . It
sounds like it was in Maine that you really first became involved more
in the animal rights movement rather than the environmental, or with
factory farming rather than wildlife. So with those activities, had you
— PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" was not
around yet, or was it just —

Anderson: Oh, goodness. I’d have to start trying to juxtapose those
positions.

Hardy: Yes. We’re talking — you moved to Maine XE "Maine" in about 1983?

Anderson: Approximately. I moved from Provincetown XE
"Massachusetts:Provincetown" . Actually I went to — lived there for a
short time and then moved to Hawaii XE "Hawaii" .

Hardy: Back to Hawaii for the store.

Anderson: Actually the very first store. It was just a block away from
the whale watching boats, and that was the theme. Whales were the theme.
Then I and my partner, Paul XE "Derdzinski, Paul \[former partner\]" ,
opened a second store in Provincetown XE "Massachusetts:Provincetown" ,
which is also a whale watching capital. That was my personal connection.
That’s where the stores went. But I was seeing that people — everybody
has their favorite animal, and that favorite animal is a doorway, like
whales XE "whales" were for me, and brings us into the larger picture.
When people are concerned about a specific animal, hopefully they will
understand that if an animal is threatened or endangered or is somehow
harmed, that the bigger questions will be called into play, like habitat
and sustainability and public policy and legislation and the groups that
support or oppose those things.

It really took off when we opened our Portland, Maine XE
"Maine:Portland" , store. We had a much larger space and we used animals
of all types. It worked out very well, very receptive. Every store that
we opened thereafter had common themes but also — in Maine, of course,
we had images of various forms of loons and moose and things like that,
local as well as national, international wildlife images — everything
from jewelry to t-shirts. But we also had the practical things, like
rechargeable batteries and recycled paper, alongside the traditional
sculptures and a lot of giftware. Over time we kept expanding the line
until we actually came to Portland, Oregon XE "Oregon:Portland" , and
opened our largest store. It turned out to be our last.

Hardy: When XE "factory farms" \\r "ff1" XE "chickens" \\r "ff1" you’re
in Maine XE "Maine" , tell me about — you spoke briefly about going up
to the chicken farms and videotaping. Can you walk me —

Anderson: First of all, we’d do research to see what was out there in
Maine XE "Maine" , what was happening. Sometimes it would start with a
small newspaper article. Other times I would just have a specific
question about eggs per se. I had the business going, so I finally had
some money, cash flow, in which could take time to go do these things.

We went up to an egg farm in Maine XE "Maine" . It was one of the
largest around. They specialize in brown eggs. They had old egg-laying
sheds and some new ones. Both were horrific. If you can imagine walking
in, and it’s just this sound of thousands and thousands of birds. Again,
they’re crammed into these small cages. The visual image — it’s
difficult for a person to go out and document all this and not be
affected because it’s overwhelming. You just want to do something right
then and there, but you’re there to document it. So you have to steel
yourself essentially to get the job done and realize there is nothing
you can do for these birds except document their suffering and their
plight in hopes of affecting, or lessening, or ending eventually that
ever happening again.

It’s something — you drive up there, and you can tell by my non-radical
appearance — this time I was looking somewhat the way I do now, age not
included.

Hardy: Hair and beard were gone?

Anderson: Yes. The long hair and beard were gone. I looked so vanilla,
for lack of a better word. I fit in easily. I don’t look threatening. I
just sort of waltzed into the places. I drive into the egg farm — it
turned out somebody did get our license plate, and we got a letter from
an attorney. But we went through and saw one or two people, talked to
them, went in there later on in full daylight and just started
videotaping. Some of the sheds were just grossly overheated. The feces
and the dirt and the flies — piles and piles and piles in the cages. The
birds’ feet were deformed from standing on a tilt. All they had to stand
on was wire. Thin wire cut into their feet. It would be slightly tilted
so the eggs would roll down, so they’d have that. Their toes would be
rubbed bare. The egg factories don’t really care because they can take a
certain amount of mortality and still make a profit. These birds will be
going for chicken soup. That’s where they go. That’s their final value
to humankind.

Driving here I passed a number of chickens going from — laying hens
going from their temporary home where they were stuffed in cages to the
slaughterhouse. I passed empty trucks and full trucks, and it’s very
common in Seattle XE "Washington:Seattle" . I actually followed one one
day and know exactly where they go. It’s just a big commercial
slaughterhouse.

But this goes on all the time. We don’t understand that every meal that
many people have has meat in it, and it comes from somewhere. The cause
and effect comes full term. These animals are there, they’re being
treated for certain reasons, and those reasons are our responsibility.

Hardy: But in Maine XE "Maine" now, you hadn’t announced that you were
going to be there in advance, but you speak to a couple of people, they
let you into the hen houses —

Anderson: No. We were already there. We were there for quite a while,
and so we didn’t know — when we spoke to people, we just said, “Hi” and
“How are you doing?”

Hardy: So you just walked right in.

Anderson: We didn’t have any cameras around. It wasn’t obvious what we
were doing. You dress down to fit in. They had no idea who we were. This
same farm was later cited for terrible treatment to its illegal migrant
workers. They were taken to court a number of times. And for pollution,
as well.

Hardy: But you’re videotaping.

Anderson: Yes. At the right time you pull out the video camera. It’s
usually inside, and you go and you walk down the rows and rows and the
hundreds and hundreds of feet of all these birds.

Hardy: What did you do once you left?

Anderson: We took the videotape to show to people. We used it for
documentation. We sent it off to various groups hoping it would help
chickens. We shared the information and gave them permission to use it
any way they could to help chickens. The Maine Animal Coalition XE
"Maine Animal Coalition" , of which I was part in Maine, wasn’t a large
organization. What we could do, because of our location, was find areas
that weren’t accustomed to having visitors, so we could do it with a lot
less effort than, say, somewhere in the beltway.

I could just go on and on. Horses shipped to Japan XE "Japan" for
slaughter XE "slaughtering animals" — beautiful Belgians XE
"transporting animals" , Percherons, totally healthy — shipped to Japan
on a 747 for meat XE "horses" .

Hardy: This is from Maine XE "Maine" ?

Anderson: No. I jumped ship here. This is back to PAWS XE "Progressive
Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" . This is right in Washington XE
"Washington" state. I’m sitting up all night because they would go out
on a DHL flight. They would back the trucks up and unload these horses.
We’d get long distance photos. Plus we went inside one time. But they
ship them to the airport in cattle trucks, huge horses, and they’re
double-decker cattle trucks, the trucks that transport cattle. These
huge horses are stuck in there. The ceiling goes right down on the backs
of their necks, and there are hooks and barbs and all kinds of things
sticking out. These poor horses were going to be actually flown as a
delicacy and killed in Japan XE "Japan" .

I’ve seen so much of it XE "animal rights movement/animal protection
community" \\r "arm1" . I’ve seen enough. I just am desperately looking
for some way to find that magic catalyst to get people to take the next
step. Animal rights and animal issues — I think they’ve had their heyday
and they sort of slid back into the background with all the other world
events going on.

Hardy: When was the heyday?

Anderson: Maybe ten years ago XE "slaughtering animals" \\r "sl1" . I
look at PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" as
sort of the barometer, because they grew very quickly and got a lot of
press. A lot of it was finding some of the worst abuses that were
accessible through the laboratories, videotaping. They’re just so good
at putting people undercover and working in the labs and whatnot and
finding abuses, which I think even lab workers were shocked at. You
can’t abuse animals without becoming numb. Some of the biggest victims
of animal abuse are the animal abusers, especially in the settings of
slaughterhouses. You can’t feel and work there, and so you stop feeling.
It’s just dehumanizing to do these jobs.

Imagine the person who has a pneumatic bolt that stuns cattle in the
head. These cattle walk up the ramp, and the person reaches over and
ka-bam. The cow goes down. Later on we find out that a lot of them were
just stunned and not really killed instantaneously. Unconsciousness can
be very difficult to find, as far as a statistic, but obviously a lot of
workers have said that the animals are still alive when they’re being
skinned.

Hardy: Tell me about your relationship with PETA XE "People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" ?

Anderson: It was mostly — I never worked for PETA XE "People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" , but I was able to get from them
some equipment, some undercover small cameras with the little cable eye.
I worked with one of their investigators. She was amazing. She traveled
the country alone and going to these rural areas and do investigations.
We went to a puppy mill in north-central Washington XE "Washington"
state posing as buyers. That was said. We talked to the sheriff and told
him to check out the daughter, because she acted very — she didn’t look
well. She looked like she wasn’t getting adequate care.

PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" — it was
never a heavy direct involvement because much of the time, I worked for
eight years working with PAWS XE "Progressive Animal Welfare Society
(PAWS)" , the Progressive Animal Welfare Society. I did communication
back and forth, but we didn’t really collaborate on a lot of things. We
were a regional organization.

Hardy: But you did provide them equipment.

Anderson: No, they provided \[it\] to me.

Hardy: I’m sorry. Yes. They provided you equipment. Did you then
collaborate? Did you send them your tapes? Did they make use of them?

Anderson: I don’t recall specifically, but we used the tapes to get a
library and database for educational materials. We’d take stills out for
flyers and whatnot. But there wasn’t an ongoing — at least with me,
there wasn’t an ongoing dialogue where we would talk a couple times a
week. It was just an occasional interaction.

Hardy: So with PAWS XE "Progressive Animal Welfare Society (PAWS)" ,
what would you say was your most effective effort?

Anderson: Goodness XE "campaigning/lobbying" . I think there were
several, because we had the time and resources — not money, but you
worked sixty hours a week and that’s how you did it. I think we were
very effective in the Ballard Lock sea lions, which I described last
night in which sea lions were being scapegoated as the only cause for
the decline of the steelhead run. We all wanted to stop the decline of
the run, but would killing these few sea lions, which were impacting
them, save the salmon? No. But the sea lions were eating mostly squid.
There weren’t enough fish around to support them. That was effective,
because we had access to the government by sitting on the panel.

The Omak XE "Washington:Omak" suicide race, even though it still exists
XE "culture/tradition/customs" , we got many people to stop supporting
it. Advertisers and corporate sponsors XE "funding/finance" pulled out
because of our heavy campaign of lobbying XE "campaigning/lobbying" and
questioning and sending them our documentation of the race. We got the
media XE "media" interest as well.

Some of these issues, they last a long time because they provide money
to the businesses that run them. People have been doing it for such a
long time, they call it tradition. Tradition and culture figure heavily
in my work. It’s difficult to root out and to create change in that
regard. It takes time, unfortunately. That’s one thing about the kind of
work we do. You seldom get clear-cut victories. It’s a social change, a
process over time. I think a lot of people burn out because of that,
because you keep knocking your head against the wall for change and it
seems to come so slowly. So we’re always looking for that watershed
magic wand.

Hardy: How about in terms of — seals XE "seals" are wildlife. I guess
the suicide horse races — how, in your experience, has the animal rights
movement differed from the environmental movement?

Anderson: Animal rights XE "environmental issues/environmental movement"
\\r "env4" folks are concerned with individuals in addition to the
larger group. Environmentalists by and large will accept management
schemes in which there is a harvest and management. There’s too little
questioning about our ability (by environmentalists) that we can manage
things wisely, effectively, or even have enough inputs to equal what the
sun does or the earth in its natural cycles. So it’s individual versus
population. A lot of animal rights folks are environmentally conscious.
For the longest time — this is changing — for the longest time,
environmentalists weren’t animal welfarists. Their worldview at that
point was simply — they accepted the general idea that animals are here
to use. As long as we don’t cause extinction, everything is fine.
Wildlife management is at that point as well.

I think there’s a lot of room in the environmental community to grow. As
a matter of fact, I don’t think that what they’re doing right now is a
solution.

Populations overall and the condition of the environment is diminishing.
I don’t think that they can face up to the personal challenges that
changing one’s diet produces. The message is, “No, you’re not going to
save the environment unless you change the human ecology, and that
means, in large part, changing what we choose to eat.” That’s a personal
challenge. None of us like to be challenged. None of us like change.
It’s uncomfortable. It causes friction. But more and more, I think
environmentalists are seeing, at least in theory, the connections
between diet and the environment, but they’re trying to get around it.
They don’t really — there’s a lot of resistance, like there is in the
general population. That’s got to change.

Hardy: When did you become vegan?

Anderson: It’s been on and off since 1968 when I became vegetarian XE
"vegetarianism" . It was on and off, on and off, on and off. It’s been
going on steady for the past three or four years. While I call myself
vegan, I think people should realize I don’t think anybody is a hundred
percent vegan because of all the products we use. Tires — you buy a car.
What’s in that? Some people who call themselves vegan agonize over every
little ingredient. I’m not one of those. If I’m walking down the street
and there’s a vendor with a cookie walking by, as long as it doesn’t
have an obvious dairy filling or whatever, and I’m hungry and on the
run, I’ll do that. I’m not saying it’s the purist point of view, but I
don’t worry myself about that when the big issues are still out there.
Disclaimer.

Hardy: Any differences between west coast and east coast activism?

Anderson: West coast and east coast? I don’t know. I have my own
personal generalities. The different cultures overall, generally
speaking. But I couldn’t say I could point out — the seat of government,
federal power, is on the east coast, so I think a lot of both
environmental and animal welfare issues are government-oriented on that
seaboard because for the very reason that’s where they are just by
location. West coast — I don’t know. I don’t know if I could define
that. I couldn’t do that.

Hardy: Last night I had all sorts —

Anderson: You had a list.

Hardy: One is did your interest — did your activities in the
environmental and the animal welfarist movement lead you to
participation in any other social or political movements?

Anderson: Yes. When I was still in the air force XE "U.S. Air Force" and
shortly after I got out, I was heavily involved in the anti-Vietnam XE
"Vietnam War" -War movement XE "anti-war movement" . There were some
issues here in Portland XE "Oregon:Portland" . I volunteered as a
volunteer coordinator to fight a ballot initiative that would have
diminished the rights of gay and lesbian people. Most of my personal
life — if you see somebody suffering, humans, I will act on that. As far
as organizational activities, it’s been largely environmental and animal
welfare. That’s just my calling.

Hardy: You recognized that you were gay back in —

Anderson: In hindsight, a long time ago. But I think I had some
self-realization around thirty. Again, I was an introvert for much of my
life. I think part of the reason was that, because I accepted the
stereotypes about myself.

Hardy: Did you come out publicly at that time?

Anderson: There weren’t rockets and flags. I just started living
publicly because I saw role models who were great human beings but they
just happened to be gay. That was part of their makeup. That gave me a
comfort level. So I didn’t really have an official coming out; I just
sort of grew out.

Hardy: What can you tell me about being gay in the environmental or the
animal welfarist movement? Is there any relationship? Were there any
tensions or was it just fairly incidental?

Anderson: The community is so accustomed to striving for social justice.
To me, animal rights is an extension of social justice. People didn’t
give it a second thought. As far as being gay predisposing me, I think
so, because I carried around this secret inside me and it caused me to
sort of be “the other,” which gave me, I think, sort of an outsider’s
view sometimes. I was able to see things that perhaps I wouldn’t see
before or have a perspective and see these cases of suffering, which are
endless, unfortunately XE "gay community" \\r "gay2" .

Hardy: Where we started last night was really talking about your
spiritual life. Let me take it different. Did you ever read Singer XE
"Singer, Peter" ’s Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[book\]" ?

Anderson: Yes.

Hardy: When did you read that?

Anderson: A long time ago. I had to go out and buy another, one of his
later editions, and started rereading it.

Hardy: Any impact?

Anderson: Lots of impact, because you put all this experience that I’ve
been going through into a book, and it was succinctly done. Of course,
he had done some wonderful research, which helped me understand the big
picture, because sometimes I get lost in the individual. As an activist
you’re involved in the job that you’re doing. I think Peter Singer XE
"Singer, Peter" constructed a framework, as Tom Regan XE "Regan, Tom"
did, that took the arguments out and constructed a framework on which we
all hang our hats and our houses and our walls and our photos. It gives
context to what we’re doing and allows us to add more rooms.

Hardy: You’ve read Regan XE "Regan, Tom" ’s The Case for Animal Rights
XE "Case for Animal Rights \[book\]" as well.

Anderson: Yes, some time ago. He spoke. He went to Bowdoin XE "Bowdoin
College" actually and spoke there one night. I went to see him a long
time ago.

Hardy: In retrospect XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psy8" XE
"spirituality" \\r "psy8" , what people or works had the most
significance, changed your direction or had a significant impact on the
way you view things or your actions?

Anderson: I think having the big picture, which sort of takes yourself
out of it for a moment. I spoke of a yearlong trip overland to first
Europe and then parts of the Middle East and through Asia. I think that
was a defining moment for me, because it sort of said, “Oh, yes. This is
it. This is the smoke of all the villages around the world that I smell.
These are the people who are living every day of their lives. These are
the animals which they use. This is the” — I use the word “context” a
lot, but I think it’s important because perspective is a difficult thing
to nail down. We all have a different perspective. That was the trip
that changed my life, because a lot of what I see in my personal
perspective comes from that journey that year.

Life changing experiences. I think — since then I get reminders. I get
reminders from what I see and what needs to be done, and then I get up
and get motivated and try it again after all these years.

Hardy: Are you a member of any formal religious group? It sounds like
yours is a spiritual framework.

Anderson: It feels like one. It feels like a calling. It does. No. I
grew up going to Sunday School like a good kid. My mother got me there
as a Presbyterian. I think during the time after I got out of the air
force XE "U.S. Air Force" I started reading things like Autobiography of
a Yogi XE "Autobiography of a Yogi \[book\]" and Thomas Merton XE
"Merton, Thomas" , Seven-Storey Mountain XE "Seven-Storey Mountain
\[book\]" . The blending of not so much religious dogma but religious
experience and monasticism appealed to me, but I could never sit still
and be disconnected from the activist part instead of the contemplative
part. There is a connection there. I don’t know if I can put my finger
on it, but, yes, there is. We live in this incredible experience. I
don’t think we have the answers. I think it’s been very dangerous for us
to assume that we understand spiritual matters. I find more truth and
comfort in the mystery of what we don’t know than in trying to figure
out or believe that we mix our culture and spirituality and get
religion. I don’t think it’s there either. Yes. When your heart goes out
to something or someone, to me that’s an extension of our spiritual
selves.

Hardy: One of the things I saw reference to on the web was World Trade
Organization XE "World Trade Organization" protests in Seattle XE
"Washington:Seattle" and saw your name mentioned XE "protests and
demonstrations" \\r "demo2" .

Anderson: Really?

Hardy: Yes.

Anderson: That’s interesting.

Hardy: What can you tell me about the protests in Seattle XE
"Washington:Seattle" ?

Anderson: It was just a phenomenal event. You see films of how labor
gets together in Europe and marches in the street and everybody is
involved in large movements. There you are with all these various groups
coming together over one general issue. The people who deserve the
greatest credit are Ben White XE "White, Ben" and some others who
created the turtle costumes. We didn’t get involved in that directly. We
marched and we had our banner. That was just an incredible feeling.

It was interesting because as the anarchist part of the event — later on
we all saw on the news — that happened apart from the mainstream, but
there’s a time when you came up and they were directing everybody to go
this way. So the masses were going this way, but a lot of people were
going under the ropes and the barriers. I said, “What’s that?” He says,
“This is where the real protest is.” And tens of thousands of people
went to that protest. There we were, standing in the middle of the
street down near Nike, and I was just kind of blown away that these
people were up on the Nike boards and just trashing things. It was so
unreal. Nobody was concerned. There wasn’t a police presence, and so
there wasn’t any conflict, but it felt dangerous. You could hear tear
gas canisters go off a few blocks away and sirens and whatnot. But for
that moment, social order broke down. Most of the people were just
standing there looking, making a statement, but at the same time I think
being identified with these people who were doing — just to break things
for whatever reason. I thought that was fairly counterproductive. We
moved out just before the tear gas came flying about forty-five minutes
later. It was a strange sight to see. I’ve never seen that in this
country or much of anyplace.

Hardy: What are the turtle costumes?

Anderson: They were the symbol of the environmental movement. A lot of
the protest in the environmental XE "environmental issues/environmental
movement" community was that the World Trade Organization XE "World
Trade Organization" ’s policies, NAFTA and everything else, were going
to take away control of environmental laws and regulation and put it in
the hands of some others outside of the political and public input
control of environmental groups in this country. It would be turning
over decisions to other bodies in which we had very little or no
influence whatsoever. If you require a country to have, say, turtle
excluding devices on their shrimp trawling nets, and then they say, “No,
it’s unfair trade practices; you can’t make everybody do that,” then
turtles die. Turtles just became the symbol. You have to ask Ben White
XE "White, Ben" how he came up with it, but Ben was the originator, I
believe, of that whole \[thing\]. People worked for weeks on those
costumes. They are quite elaborate. That was one of the most successful
images I’ve ever seen in my life — a herd of turtles that we had. It was
something else XE "environmental issues/environmental movement" .

People took advantage of the fact that there was fairly little
intervention by police. They did minimals. I don’t know if that was
effective or not. I do know some people who went to supply stores and
got “do not cross” things like police lines, and they just wrapped from
pole to pole an entire city block so the delegates couldn’t get there.
They used police tape to block off an entire street. Of course, they
weren’t the police; they were the protestors.

It was a lesson for me as well to see what happens when things do catch
fire in people’s imaginations and how crowd behavior changes people and
gets them excited about something, that they really have power and they
can do something just by their sheer mass and numbers. I can’t claim to
have been anything but a follower in that. It was exciting.

Hardy: What impact did the WTO XE "World Trade Organization"
demonstrations have on PAWS XE "Progressive Animal Welfare Society
(PAWS)" ?

Anderson: I think it was mostly the fact that because there were
pictures and images. We had a few board members marching with us. We had
a large banner. We had photographs of various issues like trapping and
fur imports and things like that. It got people — they identified with
being part of this larger thing, and it sort of energized folks and made
them feel part of a larger issue. It was all positive actually.

Hardy: How long did it last?

Anderson: Not long. I mean, because what we were doing — we were working
on trying to get some billboards together and whatnot. But what we were
doing essentially was a support role, just to be there, but it wasn’t a
long-lasting, “Hey, we’re this, and let’s move on.” Very quickly the
issues pop up and you get back to work. You’re buried in them. And WTO
wasn’t our specialty.

Hardy: What XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r
"arm2" XE "environmental issues/environmental movement" \\r "arm2" have
we not talked about that we think is significant or worth getting on the
record for historians and folks interested in the history of the
environmental and animal rights movement in the last thirty years of the
20th century?

Anderson: I think XE "ethics and morality" \\r "ethic3" I’ve said it in
a couple of ways, but I think it’s really important for people to
understand that the idea of environment and animal welfare — that it is
not even close to being finished, because we can’t legislate our way out
of the change that needs to happen. We’ve only scratched the surface. We
are wholly unsustainable, and our very future depends upon whether or
not we can pull the needed change off. If we can find a way to live
sustainably, and do it in such a way that allows people to have quality
lives, then there’s hope. If a small number of people are consuming all
the resources, that’s not justice. If we fail, who is going to be able
to manage the crisis and the breakdown? If we aren’t able to
successfully provide enough food, water, and shelter, and medical care
for the population of this earth, it’s going to be perhaps some
authoritarian government providing the injustice between the haves and
the have-nots. I’m hoping that will be unacceptable to people. I’m
hoping that people see how important it is to change our human ecology
around the world, regardless of culture. There are certain things that
have to be done. One of them is stop killing animals, whether it’s
wildlife or domestically raised. It doesn’t work anymore. It hasn’t
worked for a long time, and we’re seeing the results. We can’t manage
our way out of it. We can only behave our way out of it.

Hardy: Last XE "violence toward animals and humans" \\r "viol1" set of
questions is one about tactics. From the discussion last night, what is
your — my interest is in monkey-wrenching. It sounds like you’ve taken
the tack of bearing witness to the face of evil and then documenting but
not actually going in there and throwing a wrench in the gears.

Anderson: Right. I haven’t started any fires or anything like that.

Hardy: No fires, no spikes in trees. What are your attitudes — what have
your attitudes been towards the more —

Anderson: As far as destruction of physical property, I’ve varied on
that a lot. If there was a way in which to stop some imminent terrible,
unchangeable thing by destroying a piece of equipment or piece of
machinery without endangering other people’s lives, I wouldn’t oppose
it. It gets sticky though, of course, when you start taking risks with
other people’s lives, because the story becomes what you’ve done to risk
people’s lives instead of what you’re trying to do. That defeats the
purpose, because all of this is trying to educate and influence people’s
decisions. If the act is so outrageous that the act itself becomes the
news instead of the message that you’re trying to use, then you’ve
failed. You’re trying to communicate with people, and they have to be
open to listen before they hear the message or they’ll filter it out. So
it can be self-defeating to go overboard. I’ve seen that happen. I’ve
disagreed with what PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals
(PETA)" ’s done in a couple of campaigns.

But also I think and understand that shock value, bringing people’s
attention, puts a little checkmark in their heads so that if something
similar comes up again they’ll pay attention to it again. Some
organizations have to be the cutting edge. They have to be the “radical”
groups to get the idea in front of people. Sometimes that takes a
radical act, which is not the same as advocating violence against
people, far from it. I’ve been inspired by young people who have more
energy and more inclination than I do to put themselves on the line than
I have in the past several years.

I think tactics should be strategic, set in a larger plan. You just
don’t go out and do something and then move on to the next thing. It
should be tied in to a whole succession of what do you do here? What’s
the follow-up? Have you got the media packet prepared? Once you get the
media story going, do you know which legislators are you going to call?
Are you going to try to pass a bill to get things changed? Are you going
to create flyers? You have to strategically plan out how you’re going to
do things from the beginning. I believe that. Without that it’s just a
chaos of events without any goal in mind.

Hardy: Any connection with Earth First XE "Earth First" ?

Anderson: No, I haven’t. I’ve read some of their magazines. I read them
all the time. I’ve found them great reading and they inspired me and
thrilled me. I like the way, at least in theory, they were going to
effect change and protect certain canyons by the destruction of dams or
power lines or that sort of thing. When I read those I had no problem
with any of that. I thought it was a great idea. What we’re doing as a
species around the world is incredibly radical — killing animals when
you don’t need to for food. Cramming birds in the tens of thousands in
one building is radical. That’s over the top. The things that people
don’t understand, the things that animal welfare folks and environmental
folks are trying to fight, is radicalism, radical behavior by
administrations who are out of control, by consumption with no end, by
self-destruction. It’s all very radical stuff we’re trying to stop. I
think so far we’ve not really succeeded.

Hardy: That’s sounds like a good note to end on.

\[End Disk 4; End of Interview\]

INDEX

INDEX \\h " " \\c "1" \\z "1033" \\e " "

Afghanistan 6, 7

agriculture 8, 44–45

Airborne Hunting Act 17

Alaska 9–12, 14–22, 28

Anchorage 10, 12, 14

Fairbanks 10, 15

Homer 12

Kaktovik 30

Nuiqsut 30

Pribilof 34

Saint Paul Island 34

Alaska Native Lands Settlement Act 16

Anchorage Daily News 18

animal experimentation and testing 31

Animal Liberation \[book\] 52

animal rights movement/animal protection community 21, 35, 39–41, 48–51,
55–56

antiwar movement 3–5, 6

anti-war movement 51

Autobiography of a Yogi \[book\] 53

Baja Expeditions 11, 14

Bowdoin College 31, 52

Briscoe, Oro 18

Bush, George H. W. 31

business corporations 28, 30–31

California

San Francisco 39

campaigning/lobbying 16–17, 19, 20, 32–37, 34–37, 49

Canada 4, 15, 28

Newfoundland 20, 23

Prince Edward Island 24, 26, 28, 30

St. John's 23, 24, 26, 30

Vancouver 4, 9, 10, 12, 15

Case for Animal Rights \[book\] 52

chickens 32, 46–48

Coldwell Banker 39

Colorado

Boulder 31

Concordia College 2, 31

cows 33

culture/tradition/customs 34–37, 49

demonstrations and protests 23–26, 28, 30

Derdzinski, Paul \[former partner\] 30, 46

Diet for a Small Planet \[book\] 3, 44

Dykstra, Peter 28

Earth First 56

Earth Island Institute 39

Ecology House 30, 31

Eco-Warriors \[book\] 27

environmental issues/environmental movement 9–10, 14–16, 16–17, 19–20,
25, 28, 30, 39–41, 44–45, 50, 54, 55–56

ethics and morality 7, 9, 36–37, 44–45, 55

factory farms 32, 46–48

farm animals 33

Federal Bureau of Investigation 6

Fox, Mitchell 31, 32

French Polynesia 25

Frohoff, Toni 32

funding/finance 19–20, 25, 39, 49

Gandhi, Mohandas 36

gay community 28–29, 51–52

Germany 6

Great Britain 27

Greenpeace 9–12, 15, 17, 19–21, 23–25, 28–31, 34, 46

Alaska office 12, 14–19, 21

New England office 23, 26, 29

San Francisco office 15

greyhound racing 33

Haber, Gordon 19

Hardin, Garrett 9

Hawaii 20–23, 30, 46

Lahaina 21, 22, 30

horse racing 32, 37–38

horses 37–38, 48

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 32

Hunter, Robert 9

hunting 15, 17, 19, 20, 23–26, 27, 28, 30, 34–37

Iceland 27

Idaho 5

Illinois 1, 2

Chicago 1, 10, 45

India 6, 7, 9, 11, 36

Bombay 6

International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) 20

International Whaling Commission 36

Japan 48

law enforcement agents 25–26, 30, 37–38

laws and legislation 33

Maine 23, 46–48

Brunswick 31

Portland 30, 31, 32, 46

Maine Animal Coalition 31, 32, 48

managing an organization 14, 17–19, 19–20

Massachusetts

Boston 23, 28, 30

Provincetown 28–30, 46

McTaggart, Dave 25

Means, Tim 14

media 28, 33–34, 45, 50

Merton, Thomas 53

Mexico 11–14

La Paz 11, 14

Puerto Lopez Mateos 11

military service 2–5

Murkulief, Larry 34

Murray, Patty 39

music and musicians 14

National Geographic Society 11

National Lead Company 28

Native Americans 16, 30, 34–37

Northern Illinois University 2

oil and gas industries 16

Oregon

Portland 2, 16, 31, 46, 51

oxen 32

Pakistan 6

Karachi 6

Paul Winter Consort 14

Peace Corps 8

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 33, 46, 48, 49, 55

Phyllis Cormack \[vessel\] 9, 10

politics 16, 32, 33

Progressive Animal Welfare Society (PAWS) 31–35, 37, 39, 48, 49, 54

protests and demonstrations 53–54

psychological aspects 2–3, 6–7, 10–11, 12–13, 16, 24–25, 27–28, 39–41,
43, 45, 52–53

Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PsyETA) 31

public relations/outreach 16, 33–34, 39

Pulis, Linn 31

rabbits 2, 5

Rainbow Warrior \[vessel\] 23, 24, 30

Regan, Tom 29, 52

religion

Islam 33

sabotage 23–26, 27

salmon 32

Scarce, Rik 27

Schaffer, Vic 13

science/scientific community 13, 19, 32, 33

sea lions 32

Sea Shepherd Society 27, 28

Seabird Cruises 22

seals 16, 20, 23–26, 28, 50

Seven-Storey Mountain \[book\] 53

Shapiro, Kenneth 31

Sierra Leone 8, 37

Singer, Peter 29, 52

slaughtering animals 33, 48–49

spirituality 6, 14, 52–53

Spokane Community College 2

Thompson, Alberta 35, 36

Tragedy of the Commons \[magazine article\] 9

transporting animals 48

Turkey

Istanbul 6

U.S. Air Force 1–5, 8, 13, 44, 51, 53

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 33

U.S. Coast Guard 23, 28, 30

University of Washington 33, 39

vegetarianism 3–5, 32, 44–45, 50

Vietnam War 1, 3, 8, 13, 51

violence toward animals and humans 55–56

Washington 1, 33, 48, 49

Bellingham 9

Conconully 37

Lynnwood 31

Neah Bay 34–36

Olympia 33

Omak 32, 37, 49

Port Angeles 36

Seattle 2, 9, 11, 38, 47, 53

Spokane 3, 5, 8, 9

Wasser, Sam 32

Watson, Paul 24, 25, 27

Western Washington University 2

whales 9, 10, 11–12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 20, 21, 27, 30, 34–37, 39, 45, 46

White, Ben 53, 54

wolves 15, 17–19

World Trade Organization 53, 54
