---
---

This edited transcript is the product of tape-recorded interviews
conducted by Martin Rowe with Theodora Capaldo in Boston, Massachusetts
on December 3, 1999 and April 28, 2000 for Recording Animal Advocacy.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 – December 3, 1999

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

1

Growing up in North Shore, Massachusetts; parents of Italian descent;
their community involvement – Childhood experiences of animals and
family’s attitudes towards animals; noticing differences between
treatment of farm and companion animals – Becoming an
anti-vivisectionist at 6th grade after reading teacher’s material from
NEAVS – Exposure to puppy mill article in newspaper – Rescuing stray
dogs – Interests in human services; awareness in interrelationship
between human and animal abuse – Interests in environmental and feminist
issues in the 1970s; understanding connection between different types of
abuse – Becoming a vegetarian while working on doctorate – Reasons for
becoming an activist and rejoining NEAVS in late 1970s – Helping to
repeal pound seizure law – NEAVS’ involvement with animal issues other
than anti-vivisection.

Session 2 – April 28, 2000

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

NEAVS’ effectiveness throughout its hundred-year history – NEAVS’
activities in the early and mid-1980s which TC found appealing: funding
alternatives to animal research; advertising campaigns that show actual
vivisection activities – Legislative efforts during Judge Robert Ford’s
presidency in early 1980s; repeal of pound seizure law in Massachusetts
– National animal rights leaders joining NEAVS’ board in mid-1980s;
involvement of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PeTA) –
NEAVS as an abolitionist organization; one needs many different
approaches to change the scientific community’s position towards
vivisection – Characteristics of vivisectors.

\[Tape 2, Side B\] . . . . .

More on characteristics of vivisectors – Cleveland Amory as Chairman of
NEAVS – TC’s plan as President of NEAVS; focus on anti-vivisection work
and on New England – PeTA’s involvement with NEAVS’ leadership from late
1980s to mid-1990s – Position of NEAVS within the animal rights
community (impeccable ethics and compassion for human beings) and
position within the scientific community (reasonable and professional) –
Education and the development of alternatives to animal research
continuing to be NEAVS’ strongest appeal to new populations; recruiting
individuals from outside the animal rights community – Working with
other anti-vivisection groups – Winnable issues in the near future;
elephants in circuses; chimpanzees in animal research; use of animals in
education; use of dogs in research and pound seizure.

\[Tape 3, Side A\] . . . . .

More winnable issues; maternal deprivation experiments – Transplantation
of animal organs to humans; fighting propaganda from biomedical
industry.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

December 3, 1999

Boston, Massachusetts – New England Anti-Vivisection Society

Session of 3/4 hour

April 28, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts – New England Anti-Vivisection Society

Session of 1-1/2 hour

Interviewer:

Martin Rowe (author, editor, publisher)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Capaldo, Melinda B. Everett (Director
of Media and Public Relations at NEAVS), and Lee. Lee prepared the
introductory material and index, except for the biographical sketch
which was mostly written by Everett.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Theodora Capaldo was born in Massachusetts in 1948. A licensed
psychologist with more than twenty-five years of experience in her
field, she holds a Doctorate of Education from Boston University and an
M.A. in Applied Clinical Practices in Psychology from the University of
Hartford. She is a member of the American Psychological Association, the
Massachusetts Psychological Association, and the Board of Psychological
Specialties of the American Board of Forensic Examiners. She has taught
college-level psychology and served as the director of counseling at a
liberal arts college. As a practicing psychotherapist, she has worked
extensively with individuals and couples.

Capaldo was first exposed to vivisection in her sixth grade through a
New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS) publication. Her
sensitivity to animal issues brought to her practice an awareness of:
the connection between animal and human abuse; the consequences of being
forced to participate in animal use/abuse; and an understanding of what
contributes to moral development and compassion.

Her animal advocacy work paralleled her career as a psychologist. She
has served on the board of several national animal advocacy
organizations in the U.S., including Psychologists for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PsyETA). She is co-founder of the Carriage Horse
Action Committee of Boston and was New England Regional Outreach
Coordinator for the Mobilization for Animals’ primate rallies. She also
co-coordinated an Endangered Species in Oriental Medicine grassroots
outreach effort that reached alternative medicine facilities throughout
the U.S. She is currently President and Executive Director of NEAVS and
its educational affiliate, the Ethical Science and Education Coalition
(ESEC).

Theodora Capaldo

Session \#1

December 3, 1999

Boston, Massachusetts

Martin Rowe, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Rowe: Your full name is Theodora Capaldo. You were born on—today! The
third of December. Happy birthday to you.

Capaldo: Thank you.

Rowe: In 1948. Very good—in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" to
Josephine and Diodato Capaldo. Your father XE "Capaldo, Diodato
\[father\]" was a barber; your mother XE "Capaldo, Josephine \[mother\]"
was a homemaker. I would like to ask you about your parents. Were they
first generation or had they been here for a while?

Capaldo: They were second generation. Their parents came over from Italy
XE "Italy" . My father XE "Capaldo, Diodato \[father\]" actually went
back when he was five because his mom died, so he’s very Italian because
he grew up there but he’s actually an American citizen by birth.

Rowe: And did—whereabouts in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" were you
born?

Capaldo: In the North Shore, which is about thirty minutes north of
Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" .

Rowe: Was this an Italian enclave?

Capaldo: No. Actually, this is an aside, it was near a community—it was
Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen" , Mass., which was near a community
called Lawrence XE "Massachusetts:Lawrence" , Mass., which had actually
been called Immigrant City. There are people who have done Ph.D.
dissertations on it, and you can find them at the libraries at Harvard
XE "Harvard University" , because it was a very diverse ethnic
population—a lot of Irish, a lot of Italians, a lot of people of Jewish
descent—because it was an industrial town. Andover XE
"Massachusetts:Andover" was kind of the more WASP community where the
mill owners lived, and Lawrence XE "Massachusetts:Lawrence" was where
all of the mills were. Do you know Lawrence, Lowell? There’s a lot about
that in history, American history, about the labor unions, et cetera, et
cetera.

Rowe: So an activist town.

Capaldo: An activist town, very much so. In fact, I think to this day
they still celebrate the Bread and Roses parade, in Lawrence XE
"Massachusetts:Lawrence" specifically.

Rowe: Was your father XE "Capaldo, Diodato \[father\]" involved with
activism? Even though he was a barber he was his own businessman, I
presume.

Capaldo: No. My dad always had a rather large consciousness, but no, not
part of any social progressive movement. My mom XE "Capaldo, Josephine
\[mother\]" tends to be more of an “activist,” though really only after
retirement did she become active in various issues.

Rowe: What were the causes that your father XE "Capaldo, Diodato
\[father\]" —when you mean conscious, he had a sense of justice.

Capaldo: He always had a sense of justice. He didn’t like bigotry. He
didn’t like prejudice. He talked about how it made no difference what
color somebody’s skin was whether you loved them or not and shared
experiences of his own from his background. So he had that kind of world
view but not from a place of having been exposed to it academically or
socio-politically, just from a place of where he is internally as a
person.

Rowe: But also where he lived. I mean, where he lived was very diverse.

Capaldo: It was very diverse. That’s right. And they did have to pull
together. You know, the immigrants in communities like that had to pull
together. Yet there were certainly sections of the town that were
Italian, sections of the town that were Irish. But many of my mother XE
"Capaldo, Josephine \[mother\]" ’s brothers married non-Italians, so the
family itself, you know, going back to the 1910s, 30s, had diversity in
it. I had a Polish aunt and a French aunt and an Irish aunt.

Rowe: Was there a sense of “us versus them,” who were the WASPs?

Capaldo: No, not as much, because I think what they had to do was stick
together. So there was clearly a sense of “us” but not that kind of
polarization of “us against them,” but rather an “us” to keep our own
culture alive—to not become so melted down in this “melting pot” that
their Italian culture was lost. So in the home, for example, my aunts
became incorporated into the bigger culture, the more consuming culture,
if you will, of the Italian family. And to this day my mother XE
"Capaldo, Josephine \[mother\]" has become active in an organization
called Sons of Italy XE "Sons of Italy" . She’s actually now the vice
president of a lodge whose sole purpose is to maintain the Italian
culture in American society.

Rowe: Did you have many siblings?

Capaldo: None XE "dogs" \\r "dog1" . I had a Chihuahua when I was nine
years old because—it was actually an appendix attack, but they had said
it was a nervous stomach because I was an only child (which is not true
because I always had plenty of cousins to hang around with). Because of
this, I was able to finally get a dog. It had to be a Chihuahua because
my mom had allergies, though I tended to be more attracted to the larger
breeds—always bringing them home as strays but I could never keep any of
them. I always had to find homes for them.

Rowe: So you never felt lonely as a child. You never felt that you
needed a companion animal necessarily because you were surrounded by so
many people.

Capaldo: No, I always wanted a companion animal. I could never have one
because of my mom’s asthma and allergies. No, I wouldn’t say it was
lonely. There were a lot of children in the neighborhood, a lot of
family members around often at holidays. I think I wanted a bigger
brother. I do remember going through that phase that I wished I had a
bigger brother. But not from a sense of loneliness, just from a sense of
I just thought it would be neat to have a bigger brother.

Rowe: Would your parents have wanted to have a larger family?

Capaldo: Perhaps. My mom XE "Capaldo, Josephine \[mother\]" was unable
to have any more children after me, so they didn’t. So I think my mom
would have liked more children, but I think my dad XE "Capaldo, Diodato
\[father\]" was fine with just me.

Rowe: Now, when did you first get your Chihuahua? When you had your
appendectomy?

Capaldo: Yes. I was in the fourth grade actually, so that would have
been a little earlier than nine years old. It’s an interesting story
because the doctor gave her \[my mother\] a choice of a Chihuahua or a
poodle. It had to be a “breed” because they were the most
allergy-friendly or considered to be at the time.

Rowe: Right. Hypoallergenic.

Capaldo: Hypoallergenic dogs. \[Laughter\]. They looked in the paper and
somebody was looking for a home for a Chihuahua, and it was somebody
actually not very far from our house who was giving her up because their
little boy was abusing her. She had a pretty rough childhood and was
really terrified of children after that. I loved her dearly, but she was
very definitely my “dad’s dog,” if you will, quotation mark. You know,
she liked me, but she was a little snippy with me because this little
boy had basically almost killed her. His parents were wise enough to
say, “He can’t have her anymore.”

Rowe: Did they tell you about the dog’s history?

Capaldo: They did. The mother said to my mom XE "Capaldo, Josephine
\[mother\]" , “You know, he wanted a dog and we got him one.” I don’t
remember what they had named her. “But he’s too rough and it’s not
working, and we thought it would be best for the dog to find a new
home.”

Rowe: You brought animals home before that?

Capaldo: Always. Always.

Rowe: Why do you think you did that?

Capaldo: I think—you know XE "children and animals" , there’s a friend
of mine who calls it the “animal gene”—that there’s just a certain piece
that you have that gives you a certain perspective on relationships to
animals. Then if that’s fostered in your family it certainly is
something that grows rather than gets eliminated from your repertoire as
a personality.

I heard lots of stories as a child about my grandfather’s dog and how
that dog would go everyday to meet him at the mill. My grandfather was a
musician who ended up in a small town called Lawrence XE
"Massachusetts:Lawrence" , Mass. because his wife would not go to New
York XE "New York:New York City" with him. He had been offered a
position with the New York Philharmonic XE "New York Philharmonic" , and
she just wouldn’t go and he ended up in a small town and a millworker.
But he loved animals, so the story goes. I didn’t know him. He died
actually three weeks after I was born. This dog—and I can’t remember his
name \[Spottie XE "Spottie \[dog\]" \]—but he would meet my grandfather
everyday after work and just what a special relationship he had with
him. One day my mom XE "Capaldo, Josephine \[mother\]" was sitting on
the stoop and Spottie was there and went running to my mom, got hit by a
car, died in my mother XE "Capaldo, Josephine \[mother\]" ’s arms. So I
heard those kinds of stories.

Then through my uncles I had access to dogs. I remember Red XE "Red
\[dog\]" , one uncle’s dog, that I just adored. There was a family of
farmers that my dad XE "Capaldo, Diodato \[father\]" worked with when he
had come back to the U.S. They always had dogs that were not treated
well. They were not outright abused, but they were neglected. They were
considered unimportant. They would be given garbage scraps for food and
where they slept was where they slept. My first great dog love was a
Great Dane named Gypsy XE "Gypsy \[dog\]" . She probably—in her twelve,
thirteen years of life she probably had one or two litters a year or
whatever is biologically possible and she was always thin. At social
events I was always running off feeding the dogs or the cats, taking my
share of the dinner and going off and tending to them. There was a cow
named—I named her XE "veal calves" \\r "veal1" , actually, Babyface XE
"Babyface \[cow\]" , a young veal calf, a male obviously. I remember
going back one day and she not being there.

Rowe: You mean he not being there.

Capaldo: He not being there, that’s right. Although “she” was a “she” to
me because that face was so soft and big brown eyes. I always thought of
her as a girl because, I guess, for a child cows were girls. When you’re
a child you think they’re all girls or something. But I remember she had
been slaughtered. So I had those kinds of awarenesses, as a child,
peppering my own consciousness and my own natural given empathy.

Then XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper1" I think the
turning point was the sixth grade when my grammar school teacher—her
name was Miss Gertrude Edwards XE "Edwards, Gertrude" —had a reading
table that you could go and do extracurricular type things at recess or
during breaks. She was a member of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" \[New England Anti-Vivisection
Society\] and subscribed to—I think it was called Living Tissue XE
"Living Tissue \[magazine\]" at the time. Peggy XE "Stathos, Margaret
Moreland" and I go back and forth on what exactly the date was.

Rowe: This would have been in 1958?

Capaldo: Yes, I think around that time. Let’s see, ‘48 and then sixth
grade.

Rowe: It would have been Reverence for Life XE "Reverence for Life
\[magazine\]" by that time.

Capaldo: Reverence for Life around that time. In it I remember—I mean,
to this day I remember that experience of opening that issue and on the
inside cover there was a picture of a puppy looking out of a cage, a
very heavy barred cage. Her little head or his little head was sort of
drooped through the bars. It said, “No food, only water.” Then the NEAVS
XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" advertisement was how
this dog was being used—this puppy was being used for a starvation
experiment.

I think it was in that moment that the whole thing just came together
for me—the issue that there were cruelties beyond just a Great Dane that
maybe was not fed or tended to, but there was this purposeful cruelty
going on. I became an anti-vivisectionist in the sixth grade thanks to
Miss Gertrude Edwards XE "Edwards, Gertrude" , and then at that point I
started sending money to NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" —you know, lunch money. It was very early in my own history as
an animal advocate, as an activist, as somebody who decided it was going
to be an important part of their life—very early in my history that I
was exposed.

Then shortly after that—again, as the awareness and the consciousness
kept building and building—other things happened that started to remind
me of these realities and that something could be done about it. That
was the key, because I think otherwise it was a very depressing and
overwhelming experience.

Rowe: Let’s go back to two things. First of all, your family—your very
large extended family who had these animals for all different
reasons—was there a kind of animal consciousness in the family? Would
your father XE "Capaldo, Diodato \[father\]" and mother XE "Capaldo,
Josephine \[mother\]" particularly not like the way that some of your
uncles treated their dogs, and did they talk to them about them?

Capaldo: It wasn’t my relatives. My relatives were very kind. My blood
relatives were very kind to animals. That didn’t stop them from eating
them, but they were very kind to animals, very caring about dogs, cats,
et cetera, et cetera. A lot of them had, again, “pets” or companion
animals. This was a family that my father XE "Capaldo, Diodato
\[father\]" just happened, when he came over from Italy XE "Italy" , to
end up working for. His brother had come over and established himself.
So it’s a family that is known to my family in a very intimate way, but
none of them were actual relatives except for the fact that one aunt
ended up marrying into the family. They were farmers. They were people
who had an attitude that animals were a commodity. So that, juxtaposed
with the stories about my grandfather and his dog and watching my uncle
Ernie XE "Capaldo, Ernie \[uncle\]" and Red XE "Red \[dog\]" and I play
and other awarenesses—

Rowe: Coalesced.

Capaldo:—showed me the difference.

Rowe: Was there an urban versus rural identity, farmers on one side and
then you growing up in a town where raising animals was not visible?

Capaldo: It might have been partly that. It might have been partly,
again, the agricultural piece—that animals there were more of a
commodity. Although there were cows in my backyard. There was a field
behind this very developed area and there were farmers there but not
slaughtering animals. It was a dairy farm. But it wasn’t a rural area.
It was a pretty middle-class neighborhood. No, I think it was seeing the
difference between using animals as a very definite commodity or
resource and having a relationship with animals. I was lucky to see both
and to have that relationship part available to me because of my own
empathy and my family’s values.

Rowe: I understand. Let’s go back to tenth grade.

Capaldo: Sixth grade.

Rowe: Sixth grade, when you were ten or eleven. “As my consciousness and
awareness grew,” you said. Just take me through the steps of that.

Capaldo: I think children have a natural empathy for animals XE
"children and animals" \\r "child1" . I’m saying that now as a
psychologist XE "psychological aspects" \\r "child1" . I don’t think
it’s so foreign. I think—when my friend talks about the “animal gene,” I
think all children have the “animal gene,” which is a natural curiosity,
a natural wanting to be up close to and understand animals. Then I think
in certain families that’s destroyed, stepped on, it’s not valued, it’s
disregarded. I think in most families that the child is shown love,
care, attention, and understands what it means to be in healthy
relationship to someone, I think that grows. So I had that.

But then I had to be exposed to the world. It wasn’t this little, you
know, town, this little street. I had to be exposed to the world. And as
I became exposed to the world I learned about a different level of—I’m
going to use the word horror because that was just about to come out. I
learned about a different level of horror, that it wasn’t just as simple
as maybe the Great Dane got fed tonight, maybe she didn’t, which is not
not a cruelty. But this horror was more purposeful. It was more
organized, if you will, what we call now industrialized abuse or
organized abuse of animals. That was the piece that kept growing.

There were two moments. One was that moment in the sixth grade through
Miss Edwards XE "Edwards, Gertrude" that I realized that this kind of
thing happens to animals, and it made no sense to me whatsoever. The
other was, interestingly, through the National Enquirer XE "National
Enquirer" . I had gone out with some cousins and we were going off to a
little corner store.

Rowe: You would have been how old?

Capaldo: It was around that same time period XE "animal dealers:puppy
mills" . It was maybe between fourth grade and sixth grade, but it was
definitely grammar school but the upper years. I saw a newspaper front,
and it had a very bad photograph of all these dogs chained and thin and
some were dead in this big empty yard. The caption read, “Dogs eat dogs
to stay alive.” What it was was an exposé about, what I’m thinking now,
looking back and putting two and two together—it must have been some
sort of puppy mill or puppy farm. It talked about how dogs here were
being bred and they were being so poorly fed that many of the dogs were
eating other dogs to stay alive, according to this article, which now I
truly believe. That moment was shattering. I did not feel at that time I
had anybody to talk to about it. I was so horrified that the pain ended
up going someplace down in my belly, someplace down in that soul area
around the navel that the eastern religions talk about. I held it there
all the time and it was always a source of pain XE "animal dealers:puppy
mills" .

Rowe: You couldn’t talk about it with your peers?

Capaldo: I didn’t know who to talk to about it. It was—I understand the
meaning of the words “unspeakable horrors,” because as a child I
remember being silenced by this. But I was haunted by it also.

Rowe: So it wasn’t that you didn’t know—you didn’t have anybody to talk
to about it, it was actually you didn’t even know how to talk about it.

Capaldo: I think—now that I think of it—that was the
experience—unspeakable horror. I did not know what or how to do
anything.

Rowe: You couldn’t speak to your teacher?

Capaldo: Well, later when Miss Edwards XE "Edwards, Gertrude" came
around, that’s when I started to understand that there were things that
could be done. You see, the NEAVS magazine and my membership and her
saying, “You can do something” when I said, “What can I do?” A little
lunch money and this and that. Suddenly I learned that there were things
that could be done to stop these horrors.

Rowe: So the National Enquirer XE "National Enquirer" then came before
the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" experience,
as it were?

Capaldo: Yes. Probably before the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" , Miss Edwards XE "Edwards, Gertrude" experience. I’d
say the Enquirer might have been fourth grade-ish and Miss Edwards was
sixth grade. It was a good year or two of hanging out in this very
miserable internal place of not being able to intellectually comprehend
and yet feeling the full impact of the emotional horror.

Then there was an experience right after all that XE "dogs" \\r "dog2" ,
along with my continued rescuing of stray dogs all over the place XE
"animal rescues" \\r "dog2" , where a friend of mine and I found a
collie that had a very large scar across her coat. We knew the dog
officer at that point. The dog officer knew us. We probably should have
been on the town payroll because we were always finding stray animals.
So he let us keep her for the period required by law. Her “owners” did
eventually show up. They had actually rescued her. The wife, if I
remember correctly—it could have been the husband, but I believe it was
the wife—had been a former researcher or had worked at Harvard XE
"Harvard University" , and the collie was a former “research dog,” a
former dog used in medical research who had somehow been “rescued.”

That was an important time too, because prior to that I had learned that
when dogs were not found—you know, because we had rescued so many strays
or found so many strays—that they’d be kept for ten days and then if
their “owners” didn’t show up they would either be euthanized or given
to medical research. So that, too, was a pivotal time of learning that
things could be done. That’s what saved me as a child, if you will—that
I not only saw the horrors, because of my own empathic nature, because
it wasn’t squashed, but I also started to learn that there were things
that could be done about it.

Rowe: That would have been what time?

Capaldo: Well, sixth, seventh grade. If you take five and six, about
eleven—it would have been around mid- to late 50s.

Rowe: So you’re still bringing in all these stray animals throughout
this whole period but you feel that you can’t talk. What did your family
do with all—

Capaldo: They always helped me figure out how to help them. I remember a
sheep dog that was placed on a horse farm in the area. I remember two or
three animals that the “owners” were found. We didn’t get to keep them.
But my mom XE "Capaldo, Josephine \[mother\]" would be very careful to
call the dog officer and get the latest status. The rescues weren’t
every week. It wasn’t like a full-time job. But my guess is there were
probably a good six, seven, eight, nine dogs we rescued, and it was one
particular friend, Corrine, and I. I remember her and her name well.

Rowe: Were they spayed and neutered or was that something that you
didn’t know?

Capaldo: I have no idea. I have no idea.

Rowe: Let’s move on throughout your teens. Was there any particular
events surrounding animals that you felt occurred throughout that
period? Again it’s still buried underneath you and you’ve now moved to
become interested in psychology. But in some ways do you think that
burying of those animals deep inside you somehow also turned you into
thinking about repression or keeping things down or how to talk about,
how to express feelings?

Capaldo: The important piece, which is sort of going along with your
questioning now, Martin, is there was also always empathy and compassion
for human beings. It wasn’t like I was compensating as a child might
through relationships with animals. By the time I was a sophomore in
high school, I would have to say that human services had already become
something that I was very interested in.

Rowe: By human services you mean?

Capaldo: The mental health field. For example, my first job at sixteen
was in a department store cleaning and straightening off shelves or
doing something. But thereafter, all of my jobs, part-time jobs while a
student, were in the human services field. I worked in a psychiatric
unit when I was sixteen or seventeen. I worked there for two or three
years. I worked at a residential treatment center for emotionally
disturbed children that had previously been called an orphanage but now
it had the new mental health term. I worked at a training school which
was basically a department of corrections facility for minors. Children
who were too young to be put into the penal system were sent to this
Essex County Training School XE "Essex County Training School" . I
worked on a work-study type program for inner-city children who were too
young to work in the real job market but provided them with experience—I
think for fourteen-year-olds.

So from there right through college XE "veterinary medicine" \\r "vet1"
, I always worked in human services XE "psychological aspects" \\r
"vet1" . But underneath it there was always the juxtaposition of animal
issues and compassion for animals. Now, I say another significant piece
was—

Rowe: Can I just—underneath it. Was it just completely kept down or was
there some way that that compassion worked its way out in an
understanding of how to treat the vulnerable or the cast-out or anything
like that? I’m just trying to wonder whether there was some kind of
connection there.

Capaldo: I think when I say underneath it—let me clarify that. That’s
another good question. At one point in time I had considered being a
veterinarian, but I didn’t, as they say, have the stomach for it. So I
eliminated that possibility, and that was the only way, I think, I knew
I could help animals.

Rowe: Hang on. You didn’t have the stomach for it because it was—

Capaldo: Bloody.

Rowe: You mean dealing with blood or it would mean dealing with animals
who were very severely injured and you couldn’t deal with that?

Capaldo: It meant dealing with animals that were very severely injured.
I couldn’t—to this day when I go to the vet’s, who is my best friend, if
I’m back there and an animal is injured I just can’t—it’s just too hard.
That direct contact with injury or pain or suffering, if you will, I
don’t have the stomach. I can’t do it. I’ve just—as strong as I am
around psychological pain, I don’t have that tolerance or ability to
carry that. It was just not going to be an option for me, and I knew
that.

So that was the only way that as a child I figured was a way to help
animals, to work with animals, and I had to eliminate that because of my
own nature. I recognized I wouldn’t be a good vet. I’d be crying all the
time and doing surgeries through tears! I just couldn’t do it. So I
eliminated that.

Then I think XE "violence towards animals and humans" \\r "viol1" ,
actually, I looked more to the human service piece. One thing I was
going to say is early on at one of the facilities, the residential
treatment center for emotionally disturbed children—that’s where that
whole issue of the interrelationship between human and animal abuse
started to really become very clear to me—we’re talking now back in
1965, ‘64—because I heard the trauma of the children. I heard what would
happen to their companion animals. I heard stories. This one young
woman, for example, the guilt that she felt over having taken a kitten
and put it in a garbage can, she said, that had maggots in it. It was
after she had been taken from her sixth foster home in ten years, three
of which she was sexually abused in, two of which she had been
physically abused. She was a very compassionate child, but she projected
her pain into this animal abuse. So somehow around that time, which
again would have been around ‘65, ‘66, ‘67, the two issues started to
come together.

Rowe: Sorry. Was that news to you? Was that, “Wow! That’s the case. Why
wouldn’t I have thought of that before?” Or was it always this nagging
feeling as you were working through the human services. Was there an
epiphanic moment when you realized, “Of course!” or was it more just a
continually growing awareness?

Capaldo: I think it was a quieter awareness, but it was sort of just
somehow the pieces were fitting together. But it was a quieter
awareness.

Rowe: Was it also news to other people? Did you talk to other people
about it? Did other people see the connection, or do you think because
of your particular connection with animals that you were able to see it?

Capaldo: I think because of my particular connection. I think, for
example, at that particular treatment center people understood the value
of these children, who had been so traumatized through human
relationships, having relationships with animals, but again it was as a
service commodity not as something worthy of anything in its own right.
The relationship was not valued except how it served the children. So,
no, I don’t think in the mental health field I found anything other
than, again, a utilitarian approach to animals. They are useful for
these kids to—it’s nice for them to be able to nurture gerbils.

Rowe: But there’s no sense of markers, that animal violence or abuse
against animals—

Capaldo: No, not at all. Not at all.

Rowe: But you understood that.

Capaldo: I understood it. Now, the only thing I would say though is I do
remember one of the social workers from the Mass. Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children" had come to a class that I was
teaching. This was when I had started teaching intro psych in colleges.

Rowe: This would be in?

Capaldo: Oh, it would have been 70s, by the beginning of ‘70, ‘71. I
remember him explaining how the \[New York\] Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Children XE "Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Children (New York)" was actually a result of the American Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals XE "American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA)" . You know, children’s
protection came from animal protection. So I remember again hearing this
sort of academic, historical, socio-political explanation of something
that I had already started to figure out on my own. He told the story of
the animal cruelty inspector going in on a cruelty case and hearing a
child, and how this child had been tied up upstairs, and the animal
cruelty inspector decided to investigate. You know, children’s
protection started in America as a result of animal protection.

Rowe: Were you still getting NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" ’ newsletter, Reverence for Life XE "Reverence for Life
\[magazine\]" ? You had been receiving that all this time or had you
dropped off that?

Capaldo: No, I don’t think I ever actually received it myself. Again, it
was during that sixth grade. I did not re-enter the activist world until
after graduate school. I think I was just busy doing my dissertation. I
finished my degree in, I think, ‘78, ‘79, somewhere around there. Then
after that I became active and I rejoined NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" because it was the one group I knew
about, and I had worked with Aaron Medlock XE "Medlock, Aaron" and at
that point was helping NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" by doing, well, essentially research on research, that as a
psychologist I was looking into some of the research that was going on
in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" .

Then through him \[I\] learned about what was a real turning point, I
think, for the movement—the Mobilization for Animals XE "Mobilization
for Animals" and the primate center rallies that were starting. That’s
when I became more active. It was around that time that I also became
vegetarian, as I became more active and it wasn’t just sending money
here, there, or “Be Kind to Animals Week.”

Rowe: What had happened between—had you read any of the literature? You
had read Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[book\]" ?

Capaldo: Yes.

Rowe: I’m talking about now when you first joined NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" again in 1978. You had read that
material?

Capaldo: No, I read that shortly after.

Rowe: Shortly afterwards. So what made you join again in 1978?

Capaldo: It was unfinished business. I needed to do something. I
remember feeling like making donations wasn’t enough anymore. It was
probably because I felt like as a person now I had a skill set to bring
to bear, something I could do. My own confidence as somebody who could
do something in the world had reached a point where I felt I wanted to
do something. I don’t want to just send donations here or put money
there or feel badly about this or write a letter when somebody says,
“Write a letter here,” which I had been doing. But I became much more
active in the late 70s after I finished my doctorate.

Rowe: So who had you been sending money to and writing letters for in
those pre-1978 days?

Capaldo: Well XE "environmental issues/environmental movement" \\r
"env1" , the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . The local groups—the MSPCA, NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . I still did send NEAVS
donations. I didn’t receive literature necessarily because I wasn’t a
member, but I did send some stuff to NEAVS, to MSPCA. I’m trying to
think of what other groups. That’s a good question. Whenever Greenpeace
XE "Greenpeace" came along I remember being very excited about
Greenpeace, but I don’t know historically what year that was.

Rowe: Were you interested in environmentalism as well? Had Earth Day XE
"Earth Day" struck a chord with you at all?

Capaldo: Well, you know, I took one of the personality inventories, the
Strong-Campbell, and I remember one of the things it said I’d make a
good forest ranger. So, yes, I’ve always loved nature and the outdoors.
But, then again, I’m a Sagittarian, I grew up with woods in my backyard,
I live now with woods. Yes, I started to become certainly interested in
environmental issues, habitat, endangered species, habitat destruction,
et cetera.

Rowe: What I’m trying to do is build a profile as well of this
transition from—to an activist, as it were, in this dormant period. The
civil rights movements of the 60s—did they make an impression upon you?

Capaldo: Yes. When I was in college I had participated in that. And
feminism XE "feminism" . I forgot about that. Very major part of my
experience. Civil rights issues and anti-war, yes, I was involved in,
but I became more of an activist around feminist issues. So that would
have been—in fact, I taught—I remember when I was teaching at a
community college. I had got my department head—this would have been
back in 1970, ‘71—to let me teach a psychology of women class. Then I
remember realizing I don’t know anything about it, so I had to spend the
summer learning the feminist literature—Germaine Greer XE "Greer,
Germaine" , et cetera. I put together one of the first psychology of
women classes in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" and offered it at
three or four of the community colleges and a small liberal arts
college.

Rowe: Okay. Throughout your activism during this period and other
issues, any—even in retrospect—any glimpses of connection between these
social justice issues and animal rights?

Capaldo: I think what I would have to say is that I understood the
concepts of victimization and vulnerability. To this day, whether it’s a
child, a woman, an elderly person, an animal—to me, it’s irrelevant. If
I weren’t doing animal issues I could be right back on maybe elder
issues right now, you know, the kind of abuse that elderly people suffer
at the hand of their oppressors, if you will. I think, yes, there was
always an understanding that it’s an across-the-board thing and the
target is irrelevant, whether it’s an animal, a child, an elderly
person, a woman. It’s the notion of unfairness. That’s what it is.
There’s a basic sense—and they tell me it’s very Sagittarian—but there
are just certain things that are not fair, that are not okay—and animal
abuse and animal exploitation and child abuse are not okay.

I lived in a pretty safe world. I didn’t know any children that were
being abused by their parents. I didn’t know any women that were being
beaten by their husbands. I didn’t know those issues from the
socio-economic surroundings of the small little safe middle-class world
that I lived in. But I started to learn about it. The first piece was
around the animal piece.

Rowe: Was there anybody that you were, as it were, on the barricades
with, learning with, talking with, who was also making a connection to
animal abuse? There were movements afoot with the Boston Women’s Health
Collective XE "Boston Women’s Health Collective" , I seem to remember,
in the mid-70s, early 70s. It was sort of a new emerging—a re-emergence
of the back-to-the-land movement, et cetera. Was there any connection
there? Did you feel that there was something moving afoot in diet at
least, or was it really until after 1978 that that occurred?

Capaldo: I’ll tell you how I became a vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" \\r
"veg1" . It was when I was working on my doctorate at BU \[Boston
University XE "Boston University" \]. I had had a dream. I had, again,
been contributing money and thinking, “Oh, God, I really shouldn’t be
eating animals. I feel badly about it. But, but, but, but, but.”

Rowe: What were the buts?

Capaldo: I think the lack of a support network to help me understand
that it was easy, to help me understand that “don’t just want to do it,
do it.” You know, there’s one magazine that says all the time “good
intentions are not good enough.” I think I didn’t have the framework of
support externally.

Rowe: You just didn’t think you would be able to do it.

Capaldo: I wanted to but it didn’t happen externally. I’ll tell you how
it did happen though, Martin. I had a dream, and in the dream I was
cutting into steak. I brought the fork to my mouth with the steak on it
with my mouth open. It never got in my mouth. I woke up. I mean, that’s
what I remembered of the dream the next day and I thought, “What a weird
dream.”

Then that night I came home from some doctoral classes and I had a lamb
chop, broccoli, and a baked potato. I remember feeling I don’t even like
this lamb chop. I became a vegetarian in that moment, and it was
effortless. I always say it was effortless for me.

I had never really liked red meat because I did remember as a
child—which is why I probably early on didn’t want to eat it—I remember
again at that farm, at that farm—that farm was a very big part of these
animal issues for me. I remember, again we were having steak. I said to
my mom, “Can I have some more gravy? I want some more gravy.” She said,
“Gravy? What gravy?” I said, “I want some more gravy.” And she said,
“That’s not gravy. That’s blood,” meaning the juice from the steak. I
think I should have become a vegetarian in that moment, but I continued
to eat meat for probably another eighteen years or something.

Rowe: What about Babyface XE "Babyface \[cow\]" ?

Capaldo: Well, that’s what I mean. That’s what I’m saying. I was getting
all of it, but I don’t know why it just didn’t happen before then.

Rowe: Let me talk then about 1978. You rejoined. This was after your
doctoral thesis?

Capaldo: Yes. I think I finished ‘78, ‘79.

Rowe: And you were working as a practicing psychologist at that time.

Capaldo: Yes. And teaching.

Rowe: And teaching XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psych1" . Here’s a
leap for you. What had happened to the little girl who wasn’t able to
talk about the unspeakable acts that now allowed you to be able to talk
about these acts? Was it you had to clear away the act of becoming an
adult by becoming a psychologist and getting a job to allow you to
express it all again? Why now did you decide to go into becoming an
activist?

Capaldo: I think because there were a series of very empowering
experiences after that, like finding the dog that had been “rescued”
from the lab, like learning that from a feminist perspective you could
speak up, like seeing individuals really protest issues. It was the
whole social progressive movement as well as my own personal experiences
that told me you can do something. You can say something. You can have
an opinion. You can be active. You can be determined. And something can
happen. So I got my voice, if you will. The twenty years that went by or
the fifteen, eighteen years that went by allowed me to become more
active. (I would have been in my mid- to late 20s, I think, if we’re
doing the math here.)

Rowe: You would have been thirty in 1978.

Capaldo: Yes. Thirty, okay. But it had started around there. It probably
just didn’t start that one day. But somehow in those fifteen, eighteen,
twenty years from those very early experiences to when I became more
active, I found my voice. I found that you can, as the Fund \[for
Animals XE "Fund for Animals" \] says, “Speak for those who cannot.”
That became a big turning point in my life.

Rowe: You became speakable.

Capaldo: I became—that’s right. It became speakable and shoutable.

Rowe: Tell me, what did you do then? Let me rephrase that question. You
came back to NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .
What was NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" then?
How did you find the organization? What was it doing? Because up until
1970 and George Farnum XE "Farnum, George" it had been very much a moral
crusade, very much concerned with literature and education and
understanding. What was it like in 1978?

Capaldo: Well, I think first I came back to NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" because of an appreciation of how
important its educational mission had been to my own childhood. That was
part of why I came back here and, for example, didn’t go off to the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" , though through “Be Kind to Animals Week” I had been
contributing to them. I think also it was an understanding of the
intensity of the issue that NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" was willing to take on compared to some of the other
organizations that at least my limited experience had exposed me to.
Plus Peter Singer’s XE "Singer, Peter" book, plus a whole bunch of other
things. So when I came “back”—

Rowe: So you wanted to focus in vivisection? Initially you said these
are the only two groups I knew, so I joined them. But you wanted to come
to vivisection very specifically because of what?

Capaldo: That original horror, the horror of seeing that puppy in that
cage being starved to death purposely. That’s what made vivisection
determine one of the first activist groups that I was to belong—the
Mobilization for Animals XE "Mobilization for Animals" . I had been one
of the New England regional coordinators to get those demos together.

Rowe: That was in the late 70s?

Capaldo: Well, ‘83, ‘84.

Rowe: Okay. So that’s five years on from this.

Capaldo: Right. Because prior to that I was doing some work with, again,
NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" and Aaron
Medlock XE "Medlock, Aaron" . I’ll try not to be too disjointed here.
I’ll go back to that.

But there wasn’t enough activism coming out of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" for me, for my taste, and, as I said,
the learning to speak, the learning to shout, the learning-to-do
personality that I had become.

Rowe: Were there any meetings? Were there events? Or was it still mainly
or only Reverence for Life XE "Reverence for Life \[magazine\]" ?

Capaldo: No XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp1" . At that point XE
"animal pounds:pound seizure" \\r "camp1" , Judge \[Robert\] Ford XE
"Ford, Robert" was in position as NEAVS president XE "law and
legislation" \\r "camp1" . That’s who Aaron XE "Medlock, Aaron" was
working for XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "camp1" . And
pound seizure—the repeal of the pound seizure act was something that I
became involved in and was a very “activist” event and a very wonderful
thing to have happen for research and “lab animals XE "laboratory
animals" \\r "camp1" .” You can see how—animals in labs—you could see
how my own childhood experience would have made that a natural for me.

Rowe: How did you get involved? What did you do?

Capaldo: Signatures, you know, helping with gathering signatures,
getting signatures, going to the meetings, helping to get the word out.

Rowe: Which meetings?

Capaldo: The meetings of the activists to repeal pound seizure.

Rowe: Yes. These were meetings gathered by NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" or these were meetings coordinated by
lots of different groups?

Capaldo: There were lots of groups involved, but NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" was very much the core player in that
campaign. I think also part of the success of the campaign did have to
do with the NEAVS president’s connections politically. He was a judge in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" . He had some pretty important
connections and allies to get this kind of a bill passed. I think also
because Harvard XE "Harvard University" didn’t oppose it. Harvard sort
of agreed.

I think also—and I don’t know if this is a correct analysis—but I think
also, you know—there’s so many experiences it’s hard to pick and choose.
But along the way also I had seen an ad in the local newspaper saying,
“If you love animals, come and work with us. It’s a wonderful place to
work if you love animals.” It was an ad that said that. I wish I had it
to this day. It was for Charles River Laboratories XE "Charles River
Laboratories" , whose corporate headquarters are right here on Route 93
(Massachusetts). Then when I found out what it was I was again horrified
because I knew what that meant. I would have been sixteen, seventeen
then. So again, with Charles River here and Harvard XE "Harvard
University" not opposing it, pound seizure was repealed and
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" strays and unwanted animals are
protected from that kind of a potential fate of use in experimentation.

Rowe: What was the response on the street to a signature collection?

Capaldo: Oh, it was very successful. Again, I cannot quote numbers
because I’m going to have a senior moment around that. I know I’m not
going to remember it.

Rowe: It’s more the feeling of being out in the street that I’m trying
to get at, the response to—because this is real grass roots activism. In
many ways it’s diametrically opposed to writing your long article in
your magazine. This is dealing with people who respond very viscerally
to your statement. What was that like?

Capaldo: It was a very positive response XE "psychological aspects" \\r
"psych2" . People were “getting it.” And I do remember articulating it
this way—that the moment that excites is the moment when somebody else
gets it. Watching another human being get it is to me—if one had to say,
“Is there an adrenaline push here or what’s the adrenaline high? Where
does that come from?” It comes when you see somebody “getting it.” The
penny drops and they go, “That’s awful. What do I need to do?”

Rowe: Overwhelmingly it was ignorance, was it, that people can’t believe
that goes on?

Capaldo: At that point, I think in the history of the movement, yes. I
think it was a lot of ignorance. When people figured it out, they rose
to the occasion. Now, because it was dogs XE "dogs" —and, you see, I
also now get a little cynical. I do believe in the basic narcissistic
nature of human beings. Dogs was also an easier plight than perhaps—I
mean, an easier issue than the plight of sheeps or pigs or rabbits or
rats in labs because you can appeal to their own very intimate
experience of a relationship with this particular species. That, I
think, is part of what made that campaign relatively an easy campaign to
succeed in, even given Charles River Laboratories XE "Charles River
Laboratories" , Harvard XE "Harvard University" University, MIT XE
"Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)" , et cetera.

Rowe: Okay XE "vegetarianism" \\r "veg2" . Very briefly. Did you feel
that—what about the other connections with other animal advocacy issues?
I mean, you were a vegetarian, becoming a vegetarian at this time.

Capaldo: I think I was twenty-one or twenty-two when I became a
vegetarian.

Rowe: Could you feel you could talk about vegetarianism to other members
of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ? Was it very
much “we’re focusing on anti-vivisection, that’s it,” or was it very
much a growing broadening awareness amongst all sorts of people involved
with this?

Capaldo: No, it was growing and it was absolutely expected and part of
it. But I do remember meeting with one of the national leaders, somebody
who is head of a very large animal rights organization now. When she
came to Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" because we were doing the
mobilization—she had come to help us organize—I remember her going
through my pocketbook and getting rid of my musk oil and helping me get
those bigger issues. “Well, you can’t do musk and you can’t do this and
you can’t do that.” So, no, at that point it was happening at an
accelerated rate. You know, change is slow, so you were getting rid of
leather and this and that, and it became a much bigger issue. So that
wasn’t a difficult leap for me. Even though NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" at that point had focused on AV,
anti-vivisection, within it there had always been—there had always
been—you know, the vegetarian issue, the fur issue. All sorts of issues
had always been a part of the personalities that this organization drew
to it.

Rowe: Okay. Next time I’ll talk to you about those personalities and
whether they had an impact upon you. Thank you very much.

\[End of Session\].

Theodora Capaldo

Session \#2

April 28, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts

Martin Rowe, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Rowe: Just to recap briefly XE "managing an organization" \\r "org1" ,
in your first interview you said that you had appreciated NEAVS’ XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" educational background, how it
had supplied you with the information, how important it was in your own
childhood in providing you with a sense of what was being done to
animals and answering your need to voice what was literally unspeakable
to you, and its willingness to take on the intensity of the issue. That
was something that you appreciated.

As you became an adult and got involved with NEAVS generally, what was
your impression of it as an organization? Rather than the issue it was
dealing with, how effective did you feel it was as an organization?

Capaldo: I’ve been thinking a lot about that in anticipation of today’s
part two. I think what we always have to look at is what an organization
was doing within a certain time frame. I think given the time frame of a
hundred years, I think if we looked at various chunks of NEAVS’ XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" histories we’d see that we
could at all points say this is a very effective organization and also
clarify what else they should be, ought to be doing, et cetera. So, for
example, when some people have accused NEAVS at a certain time frame of
being not activist enough, I think that has to be taken within the
social context of what activism is or was, and when it really started to
become a way of change.

NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" was always a
penetrating organization, let’s put it that way. For example, in reading
the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" history,
back in 1935 they had hired an undercover investigator, somebody to do
investigative reporting on the conditions of animals in labs XE
"laboratory animals" and stealing—stealing pets in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" to be sold into research facilities. A guy by the name
of \[Joseph\] Strickland XE "Strickland, Joseph" . It was a very
aggressive and confrontational thing to do in 1935 when everything was
still very sacrosanct. Then by the 1980s we have the Silver Spring XE
"Silver Spring monkeys" monkey undercover investigation, and then
somehow in the 80s that whole business of being there, bringing
information out, takes hold—the Animal Liberation Front XE "Animal
Liberation Front (ALF)" \[ALF\], some of the tactics of some of the more
radical organizations.

But under \[George\] Farnum XE "Farnum, George" , under even Judge
\[Robert\] Ford XE "Ford, Robert" , I think NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" did what it could do within a certain
cultural and time framework. So I don’t see it as having major gaps of
inadequacy. I think as the Buddhists say, “Everything is terrible and
everything is beautiful,” and so too has NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" been throughout its hundred-year
history.

I would have to say that it always is a presence. NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" always had a presence. There was often
a lot of controversy surrounding what we were doing, either from the
opposition or from people who wanted to see us doing more, the
organization doing more, which is not a bad thing. They talk about this
in that metaphor of geese flying in formation and how they work
together, and they say the head geese have to always listen to the
honking from behind as long as the honking is helpful in determining how
the geese get where they need to go. I think NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" had its share of that, its share of
criticism from its own, so to speak. I think that’s part of a healthy
system.

So I would have to say it was very effective, as I look back to the
educational work, to some of the investigative work, to some of the very
hard-hitting advertising work. Even in the 80s we had ads in Newsweek XE
"Newsweek" and the New York Times XE "New York Times" . Before the Henry
XE "Spira, Henry" Spira ads, NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" was doing advertisement that was pretty hard-hitting.
You can see some of it on the NEAVS office walls here. I think within
what was available, NEAVS was an active organization. Activism in the
terms of the 80s, the post-Vietnam XE "Vietnam War" \[War\] kind of
getting to the streets, civil disobedience, et cetera, et cetera—it
hasn’t ever been that kind of an organization, but I’m not sure that’s a
bad thing. I think NEAVS’ XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" role can be a very different role.

That’s what we’re aiming for now. I’ve said that the current board right
now is in agreement that if and when we have a protest or civil
disobedience, we’re all going to do it in corporate suits. We’re going
to look different than just a grassroots organization because there are
plenty of grassroots activities that are pushing the issue from that
directive. It needs to also be done from a different point of view.

Rowe: When you got involved in the late 70s, you must have come with
your ideas of what an organization should do. We’re talking about you at
this stage and your involvement with animal advocacy. You were becoming
radicalized and you wanted to work for NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . Were your concerns met? Were your
issues you felt dealt with? This is not a leading question.

Capaldo: I understand XE "animal experimentation and
testing:alternatives" \\r "exper2" . It’s a good question XE
"funding/finance" \\r "exper2" . I think around the mid-80s NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" had started to become
involved in funding, for example, alternative research into the LD50,
for example, the work of Björn XE "Ekwall, Björn" Ekwall. That appealed
to me. It appealed to me that not only do we sit around and criticize
and talk about what’s wrong, but we have to come up with new ways of
doing things. Though NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" isn’t an organization of scientists, so you can’t do the work
yourself, the idea of putting money into funding research to find
alternatives to animal research was appealing to me. It had a very “that
makes sense” because people never give things up unless there’s
something else. You cannot expect them to find the solutions when they
don’t think there’s a problem. So if you put your energies and efforts
toward helping people understand, or at least the people in neutral
ground, that we could be doing this this way as well as that way or
better than that way, now you’ve got a nice dialectic going on. You’ve
got a nice—people have to sit and look at both sides now and say, “Gee,
you know, maybe we can test for toxicity without torturing animals.” I
remember in the mid-50s it was the start of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" really putting some significant
funding into—

Rowe: Mid-80s?

Capaldo: I’m sorry. Mid-80s. Significant money into alternative
research. That was appealing to me.

It was also appealing to me that NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" did have always a rather hard-hitting outreach
advertising agenda XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "pr1" , because we
know the power of those sound bites. We know the power of those visual
images. That was appealing to me. I remember the blinded rabbit, the
rabbit with the sunglasses, which actually, I think, won some
advertising awards, that said, quite simply, “Blinded for beauty.” Very
clever.

Rowe: Point of order for the people reading this interview. This picture
is contained in the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" “History of Compassion, 1895 to 2000,” brochure. People can
refer to it there.

Capaldo: Right. There were also ads with—I think these were in either
Newsweek XE "Newsweek" or the New York Times XE "New York Times" —with
bottles of cosmetics—I mean household products. It said, “Everyday
thousands of animals go on a liquid diet.” I like the use of
advertisement to get to the general public. I like the idea of the
agenda being to introduce and educate people around the issues, because
not everybody had the experiences I had as a child with the National
Enquirer XE "National Enquirer" and with NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’ magazine. I like the idea of an
organization being committed to finding solutions and not just
constantly saying what was wrong. I like the idea of exposing. And
remember the original mission was to expose, oppose, and end. I like the
idea of exposing, of investigative reports like Strickland XE
"Strickland, Joseph" ’s in 1935, telling people the “truth” about what
they were only getting half-truths about.

In addition to that—I like the notion of finding out more information
that’s hard to get, that people don’t want you to know, that
investigative penetrating agenda where we’re going to tell you what else
is going on. We’re not going to just let them tell you their side of the
story, we’re going to tell you the other side of the story. That’s
actually how my first introduction to NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" came about. After the Mobilization XE
"Mobilization for Animals" for Animals rallies, where it was the first
time I had become actively involved as an organizer—

Rowe: This is 1983.

Capaldo: Nineteen-eighty-three, eighty-four XE "animal experimentation
and testing" \\r "exper3" . I started to work for NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" part-time because I was in private
practice then XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "exper3" , looking up
research on research—who’s doing what XE "medicine/medical community"
\\r "exper3" , what are they doing, how many animals are they using, how
long have they been doing it?

Rowe: Whose idea was that?

Capaldo: I think around ‘85 the three AV groups had been—the three
anti-vivisection organizations had gotten together to start what they
called at the time the National Research Center XE "National Research
Center" located in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . The whole goal of
that was to analyze animal research—something that everybody takes for
granted now with computers. Everybody can do it in their own living
room. But in 1984 it was an important piece of work to be done.

Rowe: And who decided to gather these groups together? What was the
impetus behind that?

Capaldo: I think the impetus was that the animal research community was
beginning to do more—I’m going to use the word propagandizing about the
benefits of animal research. And I don’t know the dates.

Rowe: In reaction to?

Capaldo: In reaction to—

Rowe: To the Mobilization XE "Mobilization for Animals" for Animals? Or
in reaction generally to an increase in sophistication amongst the
animal rights movement in getting the word out?

Capaldo: I think it was in reaction to an increasing sophistication, and
that’s part of what the Mobilization XE "Mobilization for Animals"
did—coming off of the investigative work from the Animal Liberation
Front XE "Animal Liberation Front (ALF)" , the Silver Spring XE "Silver
Spring monkeys" monkeys XE "primates:monkeys" , et cetera. Investigation
was taking a spotlight and showing people what was really happening. I
think I mentioned it in my last tape: the most profound poster I’ve seen
is the monkey, the primate, in a stereotaxic device, struggling, and all
it says is, “This is vivisection. Don’t let anyone tell you different.”
That was the 80s, at least what I saw in the 80s. People were saying,
“We really have to show what’s going on.” Again, that wasn’t a new idea
but it was an idea whose time had really come, an idea whose time now
started to have a different level of courage involved in it. There were
a lot of “break-ins,” infiltrating so that people could get into labs,
take information out, and show the public what otherwise they would
never have been able to see.

Rowe: As far as you understand it XE "law and legislation" \\r "law1" ,
within the general hierarchy of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" was there a change of consciousness, a desire to branch
out, a reactivation of some of the great investigative elements that had
been there in 1935? Was there a shift to a new gear?

Capaldo: I think under Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" .

Rowe: Who became president in 1981.

Capaldo: Yes. Around 1981, ‘82. What was going on at that point was a
lot of legislative effort. Again, that would make sense from his
worldview, wouldn’t it, as a judge, that legislation was the way to do
it. So by ‘83 we see the repeal of pound seizure XE "animal pounds:pound
seizure" , which if I’m remembering correctly was the first in the
country and one of the strongest. Then by the late 80s there were
fourteen or fifteen states that had repealed pound seizure, not all of
the language of the bills being as strong as the Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" bill. NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" had introduced at the time (also somewhere in those mid-80s
under Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" ) legislation to ban the use of
greyhounds in research XE "dogs" \\r "dog3" . Here we are in 2000 and
they’re trying again to ban greyhound racing in Massachusetts XE
"greyhound racing" \\r "dog3" . It’s an effort that NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" is also supporting.

Rowe: Who is they?

Capaldo: The Grey2K XE "Grey2K (Greyhound Racing Ends in Year 2000)"
\[Greyhound Racing Ends in Year 2000\]. It’s a coalition of activists,
grassroots activists, who through the initiative petition that
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" has grants its citizens the right to
initiate legislation. You get enough signatures and you get it on the
ballot. They’re going through that process right now quite successfully,
and it will be on the ballot in November and people will get to vote on
it. NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" is again
interested in that, not from the greyhound racing perspective though
we’re all against that, but as an AV organization because of the ready
supply of surplus animals that the racing industry allows to vivisectors
and the dissection industry. Back in the 80s we had tried to pass
legislation to ban the use of greyhounds. Also, through legislative work
we achieved the right to do cruelty investigations. \[We\] could never
get into the lab—tried and tried and tried—like the Mass. Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals \[MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" \] and the Animal
Rescue League XE "Animal Rescue League" —to get inspection rights but
were obviously denied that because we are perceived as being
“anti-research.”

Rowe: Anti-research is in quotes.

Capaldo: I’m sorry. Anti-animal research. That’s right. Not
anti-research at all.

Rowe: Anyway, the quote marks are still there. I’m sorry, I’m going to
have to say for the transcriber, the point about the words in quotes,
“anti-research,” that was the impression—that was the propaganda given
out by the vivisection community about NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .

Capaldo: So there was a lot of legislative work done under Ford XE
"Ford, Robert" . Of course, the big success was the repeal of the pound
seizure.

Rowe: Did that energize NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" ? I’m trying to think—this is, as you have indicated XE "animal
rights movement/animal protection community" \\r "ar1" , a very stirring
time. Things are happening. I just wondered how NEAVS joined in, who
decided to join in that process or were other people joining NEAVS, how
the coalitions began building, the attitude, the feeling at the time, as
you joined the organization in a more official capacity.

Capaldo: If I’m hearing your question correctly, I think the pound
seizure—the repeal of the pound seizure—was a very important time
because different groups were coming together—CEASE XE "Citizens to End
Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" \[Citizens to End Animal
Suffering and Exploitation\], the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . I believe the Animal
Rescue League XE "Animal Rescue League" was on it also, but several
local organizations coming together to work in unison to make something
happen. I think it was a time that put out the message that you can get
the powers to be to help out. You know, there were significant senators
and Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" representatives that were helping
pass this. It was an exciting time because it was a “we can make
something happen” time.

That was important because what that does is make people always want
more. You do something like that, and the notion of being overwhelmed by
the work, to the extent that it stops you because you feel helpless,
suddenly starts to go away and you start to feel empowered. I think
that’s part of what started to happen in the 80s, which is also why
there was a lot of criticism and people were feeling like, “Well, NEAVS
XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" isn’t doing enough.”
There was a whole effort by the animal rights community to shift the
leadership of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
into the hands of more “animals rights activists” because the
legislative work, the advertisements, the educational stuff wasn’t
enough. Again, I don’t think that was a bad thing. I think that was—

Rowe: I want to go back to that XE "managing an organization" \\r "org2"
, because Sandi XE "Larson, Sandra" \[Larson\] put her perspective on
the issue and I’d like to have your perspective on that as well. I’d
just like to go back because it seems to me that this was a de facto
conscious choice in the early 80s and that you were involved in this to
reposition the New England Anti-Vivisection Society as a scientific
research establishment, and clearly we’ll go into the whole Tufts XE
"Tufts University" University and various other educational processes,
but very much to establish itself as a scientific organization, an
organization that sponsors alternatives, that analyzes the scientists
and that work.

I’ve got two questions. The first is, from a personal point, you as a
psychologist who had done clinical work in some form or other for your
degree—were you attracted by that element of it, this greater sense of
scientific endeavor in the early 80s? Number one. Number two, how did
the decision come about to reorient NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" towards this new—not new endeavor—but
reinvigorated endeavor towards the scientific element? How did that
decision come about from a board perspective or was it one person, et
cetera? If you can answer those questions.

Capaldo: I think what I would have to say about that is, that again,
it’s human nature to always want more. So no matter what so-and-so did
or thus-and-such did, people want more and more and more. They look
around and they try to find ways to have more. At the time there were
several national leaders in the animal rights movement that were
affecting the animals rights movement and the lives of animals in some
very, very significant and powerful ways. They were really at the helm
of exposing the realities of research labs, of organizing people to
present a solid vote and voice, of empowering people to make people feel
like something could be done.

Rowe: Can we have some names? Henry XE "Spira, Henry" Spira?

Capaldo: Henry XE "Spira, Henry" Spira was involved in NEAVS at some
point in the early 80s. Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory, Alex
Pacheco XE "Pacheco, Alex" , Ingrid XE "Newkirk, Ingrid" Newkirk, Gary
Francione XE "Francione, Gary" . Gary was involved in the Rutgers Animal
Law Clinic XE "Rutgers Animal Law Clinic" . There were a lot of national
leaders that New England said, “Well, we want them to come and help us.”
So there was an effort and an attempt to replace the old board, which
was starting to be seen as rather staid and—it’s nice to pass
legislation, but we’ve got to do more than this.

So a new faction came in and became the leadership of NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . Because NEAVS is a voting
member organization, with enough organizing and enough outreach, it
could happen. So we had a new board in place that did represent a lot of
national organizations. During that time a lot of good animal work was
done. I’m not sure NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" was best served by that though. I think it was a time when—I
know I was always in a sort of ethical dilemma or feeling like we’re
doing good animal work but it’s not always AV and it’s not always
strengthening the organization. So I myself as a board member had some
conflict with that.

Rowe: You’re on the board in 1985.

Capaldo: I was on the board in 1985. I actually went in under Judge Ford
XE "Ford, Robert" . I was appointed to the board under Judge Ford and
then shortly after that Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory became
president. I was on the board under Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" .
Then a whole new board was elected by the members, which did represent
more national animal rights people.

Rowe: When did the situation with CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal
Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" trying to move in and shake up the
board? That was a couple of years earlier.

Capaldo: That was earlier. I don’t really remember too much about that.
For some reason, that kind of got by me. I don’t remember that. I think
what happened was, again, they weren’t as organized in getting the
membership together to vote certain people in. I think the individuals
that did end up being voted in had a lot of national clout. They had a
lot of national visibility. So they got the vote and they were elected.

Rowe: In your opinion NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" was, as an organization, not well served by the influx of
national leaders and national groups because it diluted its presence and
diluted its message—its presence being its visibility among the
coalition of organizations.

Capaldo: I think as an organization NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" did not benefit from that approach to
managing NEAVS XE "funding/finance" \\r "fund1" . I do think animals
benefited though XE "education" \\r "fund1" . I think there was a lot of
good animal work that went on over those years. For example, major
funding was provided to PCRM, to Rutgers Animal Law Clinic XE "Rutgers
Animal Law Clinic" —

Rowe: Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine XE "Physicians
Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM)" .

Capaldo:—to fund the real cutting-edge alternative research of
individuals like Dr. Björn XE "Ekwall, Björn" Ekwall in Sweden XE
"Sweden" . The National Alliance Conferences XE "National Alliance
Conferences" received funding from NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . I remember there were several
dissection choice bills throughout the country that NEAVS was helping to
fund. I could go on—

Rowe: But not getting enough credit for it.

Capaldo: Not even “not enough,” probably none. As a granting
institution, you’re lucky if you’re mentioned and thank-you’d. Yet the
programs at home focused mostly on education. There was some other work
but mostly just education. But the educational work was even being done
under a different name. It was being done under the LivingEarth Learning
Project XE "LivingEarth Learning Project" , the belief being that an
anti-vivisection organization couldn’t get into grammar schools and high
schools throughout New England.

Rowe: Readers can find more about that program under Sandi XE "Larson,
Sandra" Larson’s interview.

I don’t know whether you were getting onto this, but I’d like to go back
to my two questions. One was the research element that you as a
psychologist, as a professional, as an Ed.D., whether you felt that you
had expertise or interests in it that could be served within NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . Number two, how did the
interest in doing the scientific element come about? If I’m reading your
history correctly, the author, \[Margaret Moreland XE "Stathos, Margaret
Moreland" \] Peggy Stathos, believes that this was a conscious decision
made in the early 80s to reposition the organization and to refocus the
organization on these areas. If that is an incorrect assessment, then we
need to know that.

Capaldo: Yes. I think I need to correct that a bit. I think the
refocusing on the scientific aspect really took hold in the late 90s
with the new board—I’m sorry, the mid- to late 80s. The focus was on
making NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" more
active, more of an activist organization, more of an animal rights
organization.

Rowe: In the late 80s.

Capaldo: Late 80s, right. It was about ‘86, ‘87 that the new board under
Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory took over. So it was in the late
80s. The impetus from members and from myself and from the former
executive director, Aaron Medlock XE "Medlock, Aaron" , who then went on
to HSUS XE "Humane Society of the United States (HSUS)" \[Humane Society
of the United States\] and other groups, was to make it more of an
activist organization. That was the goal—more activism.

It was then with the changing of that board to a new board that there
was really the commitment to what we call always positioning NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" as a radical ideology
with a professional methodology. So not to become another animals rights
activist type group and not to become a professional group that has a
moderate 3-Rs—refine, reduce, and replace—but rather an abolitionist
organization that was represented by professionals from fields that are
very pro-vivisection, but to have professionals voicing their opinions
against animal research period! Not compromising, not talking about the
need for refinement and reduction but talking about the need for
replacement. I think that was more the late 90s.

Rowe: Late 80s? Late 90s.

Capaldo: Nineties. So we’re talking two different boards.

Rowe: So in the early 80s then it was simply—let me put it this way and
you can contradict that. NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" was overtaken by events in which it became a silent donor to a
number of different organizations that were working around the country,
to the detriment of the organization given the fact that it got zero
publicity for its involvement. Consequently, \[it\] was seen as a
do-nothing organization and through various turbulent things during the
mid-1980s was subject to pseudo hostile takeovers. Is that a fair
assessment of the history? Why don’t you give us your take on the
history of that? I’m particularly talking about what happened in the
mid-80s with PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals
(PETA)" \[People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals\].

Capaldo: Right. My take on that is, again—first of all, it wasn’t a
hostile takeover. It was a takeover that was very supported by,
obviously, the majority of members’ votes. It was a change in management
that everybody was very excited about. We wanted to see more activism.
We wanted to see NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
become—I’ll use the word aggressive but I don’t mean that in a bad
way—rather than just doing things that had started to seem a little
staid and a little out of keeping with the time. People wanted to see
more animal rights activism coming from NEAVS, so it was a welcomed
change in board and in policy. It was a change that came with a lot of
promise for people that NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" would become a strong, visible, and effective anti-vivisection
organization that was also “slash” /animal rights.

Remember a lot of the anti-vivisection organizations in the past had
traditionally not really been positioned as animal rights organizations.
For example, you could be AV and sit down and eat meat. That was not, at
one point in the history of anti-vivisection, seen as any kind of
contradiction.

So we wanted to see NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" become more animal rights, more activist, more in keeping with
the times of what was happening in the 80s. We’ve got a lot of
laboratories in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . If we could have
effected the kind of influence and presence that certain organizations
were doing in other parts of the country, I think we would have really
kicked Boston a little bit more open than it is now in the late 90s in
terms of what’s happening with animal research and what kind of
effective voices there are in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" to stop,
change, or at least gather public support to voice opposition to it.
That didn’t happen.

What happened instead was there were some programs left intact. Some
programs developed. But most of the money and effort went to funding
other projects, even projects that were NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" projects but were done under different
names. Like at one point NEAVS had a program called the Council for
Compassionate Governance XE "Council for Compassionate Governance" in
Washington, DC XE "Washington, DC" , which was a lobbying arm of the
organization, yet with no visible connection with NEAVS. The LivingEarth
Learning Project XE "LivingEarth Learning Project" —no visible
connection with NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
. The Center for Risk Assessment XE "Center for Risk Assessment" , an
in-house funded project. I think the Center for Risk Assessment was,
again, a—I think it was toxicity. I think they were doing toxicity
research. I can’t remember exactly what they were doing, but again
another name and not NEAVS. If you have that many personalities it’s
hard for people to come to know who you really are. I think that’s what
happened.

Rowe: Let me examine that issue because this was going to be an issue
I’d examine at the end XE "science/scientific community" \\r "sci1" ,
but it seems to be something that casts a light—a shadow, as it
were—over the whole of these twenty years, is that you have an
organization named New England Anti-Vivisection Society, which clearly
makes it clear that it’s an abolitionist movement. One of the points
that came up in Sandi XE "Larson, Sandra" Larson’s interview which is
the reason why she decided to remove—or why she asked for NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’ name to be removed from the
program—is because the program would either not be taken up by the
Massachusetts Teachers Association XE "Massachusetts Teachers
Association" or that it would be representative of a position that would
put people off. Furthermore, within the scientific community there would
be a problem dealing with an organization that was abolitionist and
might make people feel threatened or doctors feel threatened, et cetera,
et cetera.

You’ve partially dealt with what you foresee, what you see NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" as being, but I’d like you to
just talk about how in your experience over the last fifteen years you
have tried to alleviate those issues, whether they’re phantom issues,
and answer those critics who have said that NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" should either change its name or be
silent or not deal with the anti-vivisection issue so up front but be
more covert.

Capaldo: So your question how has our name—

Rowe: Well, the name more particularly but also the representation of
yourself as an abolitionist organization, especially when you’re trying
to establish scientific—a relationship with the scientific community,
one, and two, a relationship with teachers or in the education sphere,
places where information is a loaded gun which you could use against
people or for people.

Capaldo: I think I’d like to respond this way, and that is by saying
that to take that “extreme” position is obviously not going to make you
popular. It’s not going to make it easy necessarily to open doors. But
in the end, if that position is taken with integrity, professionalism,
and scientific clout, it’s the only position to take. I don’t see how
you can do it any other way. I think the problem has been that too many
“professionals” have been afraid to say, “No, I’m an abolitionist.” So
we have this whole pool of professionals—and they exist today,
organizations that seem to be acting as if they’re not abolitionist when
in fact they are. If they took and had the courage of their conviction
to present themselves that way, it continues to add to the pool of
anti-vivisectionists who are physicians and who are psychologists and
who are Ph.D.s and who are, who are, who are. I don’t think we have a
choice. First of all, I could not imagine changing the name of this
organization. I cannot see any of the board or—really when push came to
shove, Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory was struggling with it all
the time. “Well, this damn name,” as he would say. But when push would
come to shove we couldn’t come up with another name. I think
symbolically there’s something to that.

Rowe: What was Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" ’s issue with the name
particularly?

Capaldo: It’s archaic. It’s a Victorian name—anti-vivisection. It’s anti
something. It’s very Victorian. Nobody even knows what vivisection is.
It was that kind of criticism. But we would go round and round and round
at board meetings to think of a new name and nothing ever fit. Nothing
ever seemed to really hold the organization like that name held it.

Rowe: Why don’t you unpack that? Obviously New England because you’re in
New England and Anti-Vivisection because you’re anti-vivisection.

Capaldo: And Society because we’re Victorian. \[Laughter\].

Rowe: But you’re suggesting that something more is held within that name
than simply the component parts of your location, your mission, and that
you’re a gathering of—

Capaldo: I’m suggesting that there’s a certain truth about a certain
position that you have to take and that you have to have the courage of
your conviction to take that position XE "animal experimentation and
testing" \\r "exper4" . I’ll tell you a story that I think will bring
home the point. Around the time when—I think it was after pound seizure,
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health XE "Massachusetts
Department of Public Health" had put together a care and use committee
for “research animals,” a committee to promulgate rules and regulations
for the care and use of research animals. I got a phone call from a
local activist who is very connected. She said, “Will you be on the
committee?” I said, “I’d love to be on the committee.” She said, “Now,
you’re going to have to say that you’re not an anti-vivisectionist,
because if you are, they won’t put you on the committee.” I said, “I
don’t know if I can do that.” She said, “You have to do that.” So I
said, “Okay.” The head of the Department of Public Health came all the
way up to my home and met with me. He was a veterinarian. He said, “So
how do you feel about animal research?” Well, the best I could do was to
say, “Unfortunately some research is necessary.” That was the best I
could do. I couldn’t quite say I thought research was unnecessary, and I
recognized that if I said I thought all research was a waste of time
ethically, morally, and scientifically, and I said—

Rowe: Which is what your true feelings were.

Capaldo: Well XE "ethics and morality" \\r "ethic1" , those were what my
true feelings were. That’s exactly right. After he left I felt sick to
my stomach, and I felt sick to my stomach because I felt like while it
got me on that particular committee and I did do a very big service
there, it was unfortunate that it couldn’t be done from a truer place
of, “You know what? This isn’t necessary.” It’s not necessary
scientifically and time will prove that. It’s a question of how
committed people are to pushing it in that direction. Ethically it’s
already been proven that it’s not a good position to advocate, that
vivisection—I mean, the basis for ever needing to make an ethical
argument is just beyond me. I don’t know why we’re even still arguing
it. It should just be admitted to be unethical and then we’ll move on.

Rowe: Whilst you may have felt good about—I mean, felt bad about taking
that position and therefore you would have felt good if you didn’t take
that position, do you think strategically this has impacted throughout
the whole of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
operating along this way? Do you think that’s a good position for the
organization to take strategically to be an effective organization? Not
to be involved in any sort of—to be abolitionist in that field?

Capaldo: No. I’ll tell you the change. I’ll tell you exactly. That’s
what I mean by if we don’t look at change in time, and if we think that
there’s a way to do something and aren’t willing to reevaluate that
every four minutes or every ten years, we’re going to be in big trouble,
because I did that in the mid-80s.

When we approached Tufts XE "Tufts University" University in late 1998
to talk about terminating the terminal dog lab XE "dogs" \\r "dog4" ,
which would then be positioning it as the first veterinary college to
not have any terminal surgeries on any species XE "laboratory animals"
\\r "dog4" , I made it very clear to them that XE "funding/finance" \\r
"dog4" , as they knew, NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" was an abolitionist organization. I did not go in there and act
as if somehow moderate change in reducing and refining was something
that was okay with us. Right now we’re still working with them on a
position that we’d like to help fund to have a coordinator for the new
expanded surgery which would not involve purpose-bred dogs or killing
any dogs and to expand an ethical source cadaver program. They want to
also use this person to help teach a clinical skills course. Now, the
clinical skills course does not use any intrusive teaching on the
animals, but the animals are kept purposely in basement kennels to be
used for this. Well, we can’t support that. To us that’s unethical.
We’re duking it out now and it’s an interesting place to be in with them
because, though we told them full well where we were and who we are,
when it comes down to that bottom line of an ethical position we do not
agree with, we won’t do it. We will not provide funding for anything
that will in any way continue to advocate for a system of use of animals
that we consider unethical. That’s 1999 versus 1984.

Rowe: So the transition just—fill in the dots here. The transition
between 1984 and 1999 is in terms of getting something achieved. What’s
the difference?

Capaldo: Yes. That the climate is—

Rowe: That they walked away in 1984, but in 1999 they’re willing to
talk.

Capaldo: Well XE "science/scientific community" \\r "sci2" , that in
1984 I personally or all of us may have had a harder time drawing a
harder line in the sand in order to get the old one foot in the door XE
"psychological aspects" \\r "sci2" . I think now if we continue to do
that and act as if refinement and reduction is enough, we’re very
counterproductive to the abolition of vivisection. It just won’t happen
unless we take that strong abolitionist stand.

The reason we can do that now is because of the work of people like Drs.
Ray and Jean Swingle XE "Greek, Jean Swingle" Greek XE "Greek, C. Ray" ,
Dr. Björn XE "Ekwall, Björn" Ekwall, Dr. Rodger Curren XE "Curren,
Rodger" —all of these different men and women of science who are proving
that there are better ways scientifically. It’s a little like the—I
don’t care why people stop eating meat. You can stop eating meat because
it’s bad for your heart. That’s fine, because I know once you do that
then you’ll be willing to hear some of the ethical and humane arguments.
So too with animal research. A whole lot of people are going to start to
not believe in animal research because of scientific reasons, not
because they’re going to wake up one morning and say, “My God, what I’ve
been doing all my life is ethically wrong.” However, once they change
their behavior and start acting differently, then their value system
will change. That’s a law of psychology called cognitive dissonance.

Rowe: You’ve been doing this for a while and the standard reply of
scientists opposed to vivisection is, “Oh, well they’re just interested
in stopping these things.” Just the same with the meat industry calling
everybody a radical vegetarian when they’re concerned about veal calves,
et cetera, et cetera, and therefore they want to stop everybody eating
meat. Do you find that the scientific community is still saying that?
Are there nuances in its argument now? Have they recognized—are they
increasingly recognizing the validity of these scientific experiments in
your day-to-day confrontation or relation with the scientific community?

Capaldo: I think what’s happening is amongst themselves they’re more
willing to talk about some of the good of the alternatives XE "animal
experimentation and testing:alternatives" to animal research. I think
when positioned with individuals who represent the other side of the
truth, the other side of the story, I think they still keep saying, “But
it’s not possible. It’s not possible.”

Rowe: Why are they saying that?

Capaldo: Why do I think they’re saying it? Because it would mean
admitting that what I had done didn’t have to be done, and that’s a very
scary creepy thing because I don’t believe that most researchers don’t
have some ambivalence about what they do. I believe that most
researchers have ambivalence about what they do.

Rowe: When you say “what I’ve done” you’re talking in the researchers
own voices XE "animal experimentation and testing:alternatives" .

Capaldo: Right. I think also there’s enormous economic XE "economics"
gain. Our studies—we’ve done some investigation of cat research in
Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" , for example. In ‘99 it was \$4
million worth of research. There’s real economic gain in animal research
and if I give it up, then what? So there’s a whole host of reasons as to
what’s making for the resistance. It’s not necessarily science. It’s not
because—I think they know that it’s not necessary and I think they know
that it’s not the only way. I certainly think they know that it’s not
the best way. But it’s the only way they know, and they’re making good
money, and it creates that whole defensive system that is just difficult
to penetrate.

Rowe: The reason why I asked this question, is it therefore you are
suggesting—and I believe I’ve got this right—that NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’ abolitionist position, its position
of taking a firm stand and its bringing along of hard science and
incorporation of hard science into it—

Capaldo: And hard ethics. We also argue ethics XE "ethics and morality"
. We haven’t let go of that.

Rowe: Right. But that stance is effective in pushing the scientific
community to begin to talk amongst itself about changing, even if it
still doesn’t want to admit its fault or admit its economic benefits
from doing it. Am I right in thinking that’s what you would think?

Capaldo: I think so, but I also believe that you always have to have
many, many, many, many, many different approaches to something XE
"animal rights movement/animal protection community" . So I don’t fault
people for taking a 3-R approach. I think that’s necessary too. It’s a
war; it’s a battle. You have to wage it on many fronts. I don’t fault
people for dressing up in bunny costumes and protesting and chaining
themselves outside of laboratories. I think the problem—what I fault is
people who say, “This is the only way to do it,” because it’s not. I
mean, we all have to be positioning ourselves to approach this problem
from a very different perspective and then the law of physics will take
over. If I’m coming from this angle, you’re coming from this, you’re
coming from that, it has to happen.

Rowe: I just want to go back to your work with Aaron Medlock XE
"Medlock, Aaron" . That’s when you first got involved XE "animal
experimentation and testing" \\r "med1" . Can you just describe what
that work was XE "science/scientific community" \\r "med1" ?

Capaldo: I think I did earlier XE "medicine/medical community" \\r
"med1" , but I’ll mention it again because there may be something you
want to get to here XE "psychological aspects" \\r "med1" . It was to
start to investigate research in the Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston"
area. Again, there were other individuals that NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" hired after me, John McArdle XE
"McArdle, John" being one, Brandon Reines XE "Reines, Brandon" being
another. They published some pretty impressive studies on some of the
research that was going on. Marty XE "Stephens, Marty" Stephens did some
work for NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . As
you know, these are all Ph.D.-level people who have gone off and
continued to do that kind of work—Marty Stephens at HSUS XE "Humane
Society of the United States (HSUS)" , John McArdle XE "McArdle, John"
at American Anti-Vivisection \[Society\] XE "American Anti-Vivisection
Society (AAVS)" . So they continued. Actually we had hired John McArdle
and each of them over time. It was obvious that my five, ten, fifteen
hours a week was not going to do anything, and we ended up hiring John
McArdle XE "McArdle, John" full time right after that.

Rowe: You’re in a good position here to analyze this. You’ve already
talked about your dealing with vivisectors. As a psychologist, and based
on your day-to-day immersion with the issue of vivisection, is
there—what’s the portrait of a vivisector?

Capaldo: To whom?

Rowe: How does someone become—what is going through a vivisector’s mind,
the disassociations between the animal being vivisected upon.
Characterize what a vivisector has been in your experience, is in your
experience, different types of people involved in this, different
characteristics.

Capaldo: I think the honest answer is that there’s a bell curve XE
"primates" \\r "prim1" . You have people at one end of the curve that it
is truly difficult for them—they’re compassionate, they’re humane, they
have deep ambivalence and yet they find a way to do it and they do it in
what they consider the most humane and caring fashion. I think at the
other end of the curve you have the monsters. You have the sadists. I
happen to think myself that Edward Taub XE "Taub, Edward" of the Silver
Spring XE "Silver Spring monkeys" monkeys who was a psychologist may
probably fit in that category. What leads me to believe that is in some
of the photos of his lab that came out after that undercover
investigation there’s a big poster in the background of a rather
magnificent gorilla looking rather—

\[End Tape 2, Side A; Begin Tape 2, Side B\]

Capaldo: The poster of Edward Taub XE "Taub, Edward" of the large
gorilla looking rather angry. The caption was: “If I want your opinion,
I’ll beat it out of you.” And the photograph of a primate hand that he
had turned into an ashtray—that’s that side of the bell curve. The
\[Thomas\] Gennarelli XE "Gennarelli, Thomas" tapes where we have video
footage of researchers dangling and making fun of—I think it was baboons
that had suffered severe brain injury that had been created in the
laboratory, making jokes about “Smile for the camera. We hope the
anti-vivisectionists don’t get a hold of this.” Harry Harlow XE "Harlow,
Harry" , who by his own admission, in terms of some of the language he
uses—very sadistic, very cruel, and totally insensitive to what’s going
on. I do believe that there are a certain percentage of researchers who
have that kind of mentality. That’s the other end of the mentality of
researchers that really are kind, caring, very compassionate
individuals.

Then there’s the whole lot in between which I think is the largest
percentage; the main reason being because human beings don’t always have
the power of their own individual convictions. The group mentality, the
need to be part of standard operating procedure, to not speak your mind,
is probably the greatest factor in perpetuating the use of animals in
this way. We have individuals who are “on our side” now who talk about
what they did and why they did it. They did it because they didn’t have
the strength to voice opposition to it. I think there are a whole lot of
animal researchers and people using animals in educational science
training that probably fall into that category.

They’re the ones that you can probably get a reasoned professional
anti-vivisectionist to appeal to, to reach your hand in and help pull
them out of the quagmire because now they have other role models of
other professionals. It’s not just those—here’s the quotes again—“wacky
animal rights people,” but people like me who have taken a position and
said, “No, I won’t do that. No, I don’t think that’s beneficial. Yes, I
need to find another way because it offends me. I have too much
integrity for that.”

But I think most people are fearful, and I would even use the word
cowardly. I don’t mean that in a judgmental way but I mean people do not
always have the strength of their own convictions. They torment over it.
Then after they torment over it, then the psychology is such that they
find a way to heal up over it and build a defensive system, and then
they’re lost. So that’s my answer as a shrink!

Rowe: What percentages have you discovered? Have you any idea? This is
research on the researchers maybe didn’t involve the psychology of it.

Capaldo: That’s very interesting.

Rowe: But in your general feeling of experience over the years.

Capaldo: I think it’s the bell curve. What was the bell curve? You’ve
got like 76 percent under the big dome and then you’ve got—what was
it?—four to six percent at one end and four to six percent at the other.

Rowe: In other words it’s a tiny percentage who are deeply conflicted
about it and want to change.

Capaldo: No, no. I’m saying I think a lot of people go into it
conflicted, but because they’re concerned about that normative position
in society—

Rowe: They cover over it.

Capaldo: They find a way through their own natural aversion to something
that they should be averse to, and they do it because it’s what it means
to be a doctor, a veterinarian, a scientist.

Rowe: And you think those could change very quickly in a flash if it was
somehow made acceptable for them to come out against vivisection?

Capaldo: I would love it if it could happen very quickly in a flash. I’m
not sure about that part.

Rowe: But psychologically, all they’re looking for is a way out of that.

Capaldo: Yes. Which is part of why this board is now, and the staff, is
committed to reaching students because that’s where the indoctrination
and the desensitization starts. If you can reach in and give them
support and other role models, I think it can save some of them from
having this callousing—I don’t know the verb—but to callous over, this
becoming callous phenomenon from happening.

Rowe: You’d like callous to be spelled “callous.” Cleveland XE "Amory,
Cleveland" Amory is becoming chairman of the board in 1987. Apart from
the fact that he was one of the leading lights of the animal rights
movement, why Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" ?

Capaldo: He was a Bostonian and he was loved by Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" . My last time seeing Cleveland XE "Amory,
Cleveland" before he died was when he presented at the 150th celebration
of the Boston Public Library XE "Boston Public Library" which is the
oldest free library in the country. When I went—which I think was maybe
four or five months before he died, three or four months before he
died—I remembered what an ambassador he was, because in an audience of
not animal people at all, he brought a very hard radical and right
message and said it in a way that allowed people to hear him. They would
not have tolerated—or not tolerated the same message from many other
people. They would not have gone out of their way to see so-and-so or
thus-and-such speak about these animal issues. But Cleveland XE "Amory,
Cleveland" was loved by Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" and people felt
that as a figurehead for a New England organization there was nobody
better than Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" . And he had a strong
affinity and connection with Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" .

Rowe: What did he bring to the organization as an organization?

Capaldo: He brought—he validated us.

Rowe: Within the Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" community? Within the
scientific community? Within the animal rights community?

Capaldo: I think within the literary community. I’m not sure about the
scientific community. But within the cultured educated community,
Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" being associated with us leant
credibility to our message.

Rowe: Within intelligentsia, you mean, not literary in English
literature.

Capaldo: Right. Yes.

Rowe: How did he shape—how did he make his stamp upon the organization?
Did he usher in a different direction or desire different things from
the organization that it had had before under Judge Ford XE "Ford,
Robert" ?

Capaldo: Cleveland worked under Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" . Cleveland
XE "Amory, Cleveland" worked with President Farnum XE "Farnum, George" .
Cleveland had been on the board in the past. He even knew \[John\]
O’Neil XE "O’Neil, John" . I don’t remember if it was O’Neil or Farnum
XE "Farnum, George" , but he knew them both and I think it was under
O’Neil. But Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" had always had an
affiliation with NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
. It wasn’t like he just came in at that point. He had always had a
relationship with NEAVS.

I think I’d have to say that Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" was very
much a team player. He did not have an arrogance or an “I know the best
way to do it.” I do remember board meetings where he certainly never was
short on words of advice, opinion, or direction. But he very much could
be a team player. If he could be convinced that this was a way to do
something, he would go along with it. So I think he presented a kind of
balance to the board. If something seemed a little outrageous and
radical or too far-out to him, he would put his foot down and not go
along with it. Of course, somebody of his stature, he carried a lot of
weight. He was only one vote, but we all know that votes have different
weights and he had a lot of weight. Like I said, I think he helped us
reconnect with the Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" community.

Rowe: How had you felt that you needed a reconnection with the Boston
community, beyond the fact that he was a Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" brahmin, famed son of Boston?

Capaldo: He helped us reconnect with the Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" animal rights community. I’m sorry. Let me
rephrase that. Because people knew and loved Cleveland XE "Amory,
Cleveland" . They knew about the burros and they knew about the Fund
\[for Animals XE "Fund for Animals" \]. They knew about Black Beauty
Ranch. They knew who and what Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" was. He
had impeccable credibility in terms of his commitment to animals. He
wasn’t somebody who was doing this on the side or hiring this one to do
this, which was some of the controversy around Judge Ford XE "Ford,
Robert" . Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" was a committed lifer and, in
fact, the father of the movement in America.

Rowe: What more could you ask?

Capaldo: What’s not to like about him?

Rowe: That also presumably stimulated membership?

Capaldo: Yes.

Rowe: And funds and visibility, which had been a problem under your
estimation in the early 80s and the mid-80s when NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’ interests were defracted through
these other groups. Am I right in thinking that?

Capaldo: Yes. Actually, you’ve just framed something for me that I
hadn’t thought of before, but I think you’re absolutely right. I don’t
know if you even know what you just said. \[Laughter\]. I think you’re
absolutely right that Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" —in a sense,
Cleveland was the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" presence even during that time when NEAVS was spending most of
its time and resources helping and developing other groups, other
campaigns, things outside of NEAVS. But Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland"
did present—in a sense, he sort of held it together. He was the cement.
Like if he hadn’t been there, then one would wonder just how diluted
NEAVS would have become through using NEAVS as a funding organization.
But he created a—he was a figurehead. He was a presence for us, and also
very committed to NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" , by the way. Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" was very
committed to NEAVS, very dedicated. He did not need to do this. He had
plenty to do with the Fund. He did this out of a love for NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .

Rowe: I should say when the Fund is mentioned it’s the Fund for Animals
XE "Fund for Animals" .

Capaldo: His commitment to NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" had a sincerity to it.

Rowe: So he committed time and energy.

Capaldo: Yes. He was here at all the board meetings. He flew up from New
York. Absolutely.

Rowe: Was he also a person to bring about healing after the difficult
period of the mid-80s and Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" ’s resignation?

Capaldo: I don’t know what you mean by healing. I’m not sure there was
anything to be healed at that point. I think it was almost more like
what some animals do. I think lobsters do it. The claw breaks off and
then it grows a new one. I don’t think there was any damage that needed
to be healed in that way. I think it just moved on and started to do new
things. In other words, the community under Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert"
was not the strong AR \[animal rights\] community, so not much was lost
in a sense of that kind of momentum that an organization needs.

Rowe: You became president. What did you hope to bring? What was your
résumé that you wanted to bring to NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ? What direction did you want to take
the organization? You specifically, what concerns did you feel you would
like to work on and address?

Capaldo: I think if you look at the movement you’ll see that there’s not
a lot of AV work XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper5" .
I know that sounds weird, but when you really think about it, I would
have to say that I think anti-vivisection is the hardest issue. There
are a lot of hard issues out there, and it may be neck-and-neck with a
few, but I think it still wins by a neck. I think because of that many,
many organizations who also do AV tend to do a lot of other stuff. I
always say, “Boy, I wish I were trying to save elephants from circuses,”
not that that’s easy. That’s hard grueling work. But compared to
anti-vivisection—it’s a hard issue.

I think what I myself had hoped to do was to return NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" to its anti-vivisection
mission. You know that old expression, it’s a dirty job but somebody’s
got to do it. I think when I saw as a board member and then as not a
board member how diluted the anti-vivisection mission had become, and
wildlife and performing animal and farming issues were being done and
the board actually at one point changed the mission statement—so it was
all done legally—to say “and animal suffering wherever it may occur,”
and then it started to be “wherever it may occur” more and more and less
and less around vivisection. So my own interest was to return it to its
original mission, which was as an anti-vivisection organization.

And secondly to try to develop the kind of staff and the overarching
philosophy and policies that would begin to make it a force to be dealt
with in New England. We are the second or third largest recipient of NIH
\[National Institutes of Health XE "National Institutes of Health (NIH)"
\] grants, for example, in animal research in the country.

Rowe: Boston is.

Capaldo: Boston. Absolutely Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . When Dr.
Ray Greek XE "Greek, C. Ray" was here on his book tour, Sacred Cows and
Golden Geese: The Human Cost of Experiments on Animals XE "Sacred Cows
and Golden Geese\\: The Human Cost of Experiments on Animals" , I said,
“Do you want a little tour of Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" ?” and he
laughed at me. I said, “No, no. I’m going to take you to all the medical
and research centers,” because when you drive around you get a sense of
how enormous the vivisection industry is. It’s not this theoretical
thing. We went over by Harvard Medical School XE "Harvard Medical
School" on Longwood Ave. and just stood in front of these huge—I think
they’re marble—columned buildings in a horseshoe-shaped courtyard. Just
standing there you just see how enormous vivisection is, how entrenched
and enormous it is.

There’s a line from that movie that said, “It’s not David and Goliath,
it’s David against Goliath and Goliath’s whole family.” But you can’t
back off from that. We’ve been here a hundred years. We’re going to be
here another hundred years. We might as well build some muscle and find
ways to effect change. That was my agenda because, remember, that’s how
I was introduced to NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" as a child, as an anti-vivisection organization.

Rowe: Did other members of the board feel like you did that the
organization had wavered from its—

Capaldo: Absolutely. And that’s what I mean by the geese from behind
always do the honking to let the geese up front know, the lead geese,
what’s got to be done. The way they honked around Judge Ford XE "Ford,
Robert" is the same way they honked around the board that was then
controlled and directed by other national organizations. They’ll honk
again. Five years from now, ten years from now, they’ll be honking
saying, “We should be doing this rather than that.” There’s wisdom in
that.

Rowe: How did Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" react to the honking?

Capaldo: Actually, I was around for that. I think in the beginning he
didn’t think it was real, and then he just went, “Well, see you later.”
I think his transition out was not that difficult. I think he knew it
was time for him to go and he sort of saw the writing on the wall and so
he left.

Rowe: I’d just like you to provide your side of the story of the attempt
by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals XE "People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" to install Alex Pacheco XE
"Pacheco, Alex" as the head of the organization. I want you to provide
me with the correct facts, the facts as you determined them in that
whole saga, which seems to have dragged on a number of years into your
tenure. That must have been in some ways a distraction from some of the
other activities that you wanted to get involved with.

Capaldo: Do you mean before or after I was appointed president?

Rowe: I’m talking about everything from 1988 on to the final conclusion
in 1997—1988 to 1997, the various—

Capaldo: I think I’ll give you a very simple version of the story, which
is that Alex Pacheco as vice president—there may have been assumptions
about who would be president when Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" left.
I don’t know if there were, but there may have been. I think people
didn’t want to let go of an organization that had considerable assets
and was a way to do good animal work. I don’t fault anybody for that.
Why would you want to get rid of that? Why would you want to let go of
that?

So it had to be wrestled free a bit, and I think we did a good job doing
that. I think we won, so to speak, and everybody resigned and we were
able to put in a whole new board, predominantly of New Englanders,
though we do have, as you know, Dr. Marjorie Cramer XE "Cramer,
Marjorie" . Her MD is critical to the direction we want to go in. She
too has been a long-standing NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" supporter. And also in a funny bizarre kind of way it’s
always been New England and New York XE "New York" . For example, our
education programs were always like New England and New York. In fact, I
think we might even be incorporated in New York or something. So I think
it’s that simple. It was an organization with some assets and you want
to do animal work and this is a way of doing it, so why let go of it?

Rowe: There was ill will.

Capaldo: There was ill will?

Rowe: Was there?

Capaldo: It could be testy at times, yes. I think when two different
people or two different sides want two different things, there’s always
bound to be ill will. But again, I think that the side that prevailed
also had the strength of Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory with
them. I think that was an important part of the change in leadership. I
think because Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" was behind the side that
prevailed, so to speak, or my presidency, I think it was inevitable that
it happened that way. I don’t think it was a surprise. I think it was a
bit of a struggle and a wrestling match, but Cleveland XE "Amory,
Cleveland" carried weight. \[Tape interruption\].

As I said, I think we had the presence, integrity, influence, and I want
to say protection. Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" called me right after
I was appointed president. He said, “I want you to know that you’re
loved and protected by the people who helped put you in there, so if you
need anything you just let us know.” That was the kind of attitude
Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" had about things, that he really did
have a presence and he really was willing to stand behind something.

When I said earlier about how important it is to take an
anti-vivisection perspective XE "science/scientific community" \\r
"med2" , that if we shy from that XE "medicine/medical community" \\r
"med2" , especially in the year 2000 when there’s ample scientific
evidence for it and the ethical arguments have been made and remade,
that’s one of the things that I think he brought to his leadership,
which was impeccable integrity around animals. I’ve never seen Cleveland
XE "Amory, Cleveland" walk in a room where there was an animal and not
take time to pat, to hold, to really connect. I mean, the genuineness of
his commitment was always there and it allowed him to say outrageous
things, and it allowed him with his humor to say it in a way that people
really heard. I think he’s a good example of not having to shy away from
a certain perspective if you can figure out how to say it right.

Rowe: Well, you said something very alarming just a few moments ago in
that the New England Anti-Vivisection Society will be around for another
hundred years.

Capaldo: It’s only because I feel 104 being here two years!

Rowe: Why will it be around for another hundred years, and what are you
doing to make sure that it’s not around in another hundred years?
\[Laughter\].

Capaldo: Well, research will always be necessary. Let’s assume that we
don’t become—

Rowe: When you say research, what do you mean by research?

Capaldo: I mean research. I don’t just mean animal experimentation. I
mean research. I mean scientific inquiry into new and better ways of
doing things. If all goes according to plan, when we end animal
experimentation, an organization that had helped put that out of
business may begin to be able to be more committed to “well, how else
can we do things?” Remember NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" was founded as an organization to not just protect
animals but to protect “lunatics, criminals, paupers.” It was an
organization that was developed at the turn of the century to protect
human beings, too. It cared about people, too, and it still does. So I
think that’s what I mean. I think I was also being facetious about we’ll
be here for another hundred years, but sometimes it feels like that.
This isn’t an easy battle.

Rowe: So you would see the organization as returning to its original
mission by also being a kind of watchdog to make sure that the kinds of
experiments that took place even up as near ago as thirty-five years ago
on the Tuskegee medical experiments, syphilis experiments, didn’t occur
again, in addition to making sure that the animal experimentations
didn’t happen again.

Capaldo: Right.

Rowe: That’s an interesting perspective forward XE "ethics and morality"
\\r "ethic3" . So let’s talk about the future XE "animal rights
movement/animal protection community" \\r "ethic2" , talk about the
future strategically, both in terms of the way—well, let’s do this
first. Strategically—the way the organization seeks to position itself
within the scientific community, within the larger community as a whole,
and within the animal rights community. How will it do those things?
What do you think it needs to do with those things?

Capaldo: It needs first of all to have impeccable ethics. One of the
concerns that I have about some of the approaches of some of the animal
groups is that it really does seem often anti-human and it makes us so
vulnerable to that criticism. There’s no criticism that offends me more,
having been somebody who has spent my life helping people. I think
ethical integrity means that we can’t lose our compassion for human
beings. It’s not an us-them. If we continue to position it as an us-them
with us now protecting the us of animals and not the us of human
animals, we lose credibility. That’s a hard one to do because—you know,
there’s the Buddhist expression: “Be careful in fighting the monster
that you don’t become the monster.” To be enraged, to be angry, to be
wanting to get an Uzi on a rooftop, because that’s a solution—it’s an
easy step to take. But I think if we’re to really affect society as a
whole we have to always make that clear that we are people who care
about human animals and animals—or, I should say, “other” animals. I
think that’s going to start to soften some of the radicalism and
outrageous positions that some animal groups have wanted to take or had
to take to get attention.

Rowe: When you say the outrageousness, do you mean these sort of
publicity stunts or do you mean the actual official statements from an
organization about a particular subject? Are you talking about the
cosmetic elements of outrageousness or the actual systemic, deliberate,
structural sort of androphobia, anthropophobic type attitudes?

Capaldo: If I understand you correctly, I mean both. I don’t think that
the negativity towards human beings is—I don’t think it’s a character
flaw. I think it’s a result of the business. I think you get burned out.
I think it’s very hard to see some of the outrageous things that people
see and not turn against the human species who is the perpetrator. I
think it’s an occupational hazard. I think burnout is high in the
movement. I think it’s scary. I think we don’t—as a movement, we haven’t
found a way to really address it. It sounds like too much airy-fairy
psychological talk. Yet if you look around you see it, because remember
we’re now looking at people who are twenty-year veterans of anal
electrocution of fur XE "fur" animals and downed cows suffering. We’ve
seen it all and it’s real easy to get into a pretty bad funk about it. I
think that’s one of the most important things is to try to maintain the
integrity of that ethical position without becoming so enraged, so
hardened, so saddened that you become another kind of us-them.

Rowe: That’s in the community.

Capaldo: That’s in the community.

Rowe: How about the scientific community XE "science/scientific
community" \\r "sci3" , the strategic positioning of NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" vis-à-vis the scientific
community XE "medicine/medical community" \\r "sci3" , the other
scientific community XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "sci3"
?

Capaldo: I think there, too, the first part is to show integrity. I was
talking to somebody the other day who is actually an inspector of
laboratories. He said, “I remember. You were always one of the
reasonable ones.” I think that’s part of how we position ourselves with
the scientific community: to be the reasonable ones.

Rowe: When he says reasonable ones, what do you think he means?

Capaldo: I think he means you just don’t go off and say whatever the
hell you feel like saying at the moment. You think about what you’re
going to say and you say it in a way that continues, without losing the
passion or the emotionally impelling part of your argument. You say it
in a way that is reasonable. It’s not necessarily running around doing
stunts. Yet it’s not backing down and saying, “Well, you’ve got a point
there. I do understand why that research is necessary.” That’s not
reasonable; that’s cowardly. But to sort of position your argument
always as “No, we can talk about this. It doesn’t mean I’m going to back
down. It doesn’t mean I’m going to agree with you. But we can talk about
this. We can look at this. No, no, no, this is really as far as we’re
going to go. I know you’d like us to go further.” This clinical skills
things that we’re doing with Tufts XE "Tufts University" right
now—they’re not happy about it. They want us to just forget about it and
go away, and we keep going back and saying, “This is our position. This
is our position.”

Rowe: This is the dogs in the basement.

Capaldo: Right. And in terms of the evils we’re up against, not a
particularly—

Rowe: Not a great evil.

Capaldo: Yes.

Rowe: But nonetheless one that is unacceptable, and therefore that is
the absolutism of your position.

Capaldo: Right. So I think in terms of the scientific community, we have
to do that, and we have to surround ourselves with scientists, men like
Björn XE "Ekwall, Björn" Ekwall, physicians like Marjorie Cramer XE
"Cramer, Marjorie" , Ray Greek XE "Greek, C. Ray" . We had the great
pleasure of having Dr. Greek here on April 15th. We flooded the Longwood
medical area with posters about him. We used their own language. We said
something like “Priority Seating to Medical Personnel” or something.

You’re making it professional. And lo and behold we got some people from
that medical community and we got a young woman who’s a post-doc
two-year position at Harvard XE "Harvard University" . She’s doing
epidemiological research. She came over to hear what was going on. She’s
with us and she needs help. She needs support. “How can I survive here
when everybody wants me to do animal research?” We had a young couple
come in. The woman has been an animal rights person for years, and her
husband, though she wouldn’t say where, is an animal researcher in a
biotechnology firm. She came up after the presentation, approached me,
and said, “It’s obvious where your heart is.” She had tears in her eyes
because she said, “My husband absolutely agreed with everything Dr.
Greek XE "Greek, C. Ray" said.” You could see how in that moment
suddenly in this marriage that had had this issue, there was a common
ground that they could maybe think and talk about. That’s the
professional approach. That’s how we’ll reach the scientific community.

Rowe: Would the husband come over to your camp? Is he one of that 76
percent tucked underneath the bell curve?

Capaldo: Well, you don’t know, but one would hope. That’s why we’re
doing what we’re doing the way we’re doing it so that individuals like
him can hear a different perspective than just the stunts. (Stanley just
joined us, our office kitty mate.)

Rowe: Stanley XE "Stanley \[cat\]" is the cat, by the way. So those are
the strategies. Just some forward-thinking plans that you have that may
not be in fruition yet and may not have even been discussed yet but
something you would like to see in the future specifically to address
these issues of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
’ position and plan to expand its outreach and position itself within
the animal advocacy community and within the community as a whole.

Capaldo: Do you mean sort of hard programs, ideas for programs over the
next couple of years or overarching—

Rowe: I’m talking about dreams as well as hard programs, things that are
coming up in the future, because this material—this can be in square
brackets—this material will be used in the future to see if NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" lived up to its
expectations or managed to fulfill its mandate. \[Laughter\].

Capaldo: Two of the strongest commitments will continue to be toward
education XE "education" \\r "educ1" and the development of
“alternatives.” If you can come up with a better word XE "animal
experimentation and testing:alternatives" \\r "educ1" , I’d be real
happy. I did find a way around human and non-human animals, which always
bugged me because we’re still using humans as the measure. I thought
human animals and other animals—that might do it. “Alternatives” we
haven’t come up with one yet, with a good linguistic change.

So education and the development of alternatives are going to continue
to be important, because (I think it was the Jesuits or Wordsworth), but
somebody said, “Give me a child until he’s five and I’ll have the man
for the rest of his life XE "children and animals" .” As a psychologist
I believe that, that obviously the young thinking mind before it’s
indoctrinated is where you can start to lay some seeds that maybe, maybe
will prevent them—will give them an immune system to becoming a part of
the pack of “vivisection is okay.” Education will continue to be one of
our strongest commitments.

Rowe: Which returns us to that thorny issue of how does NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" get into the classrooms. How
does NEAVS get into the classrooms unless it’s under this different
rubric? How has it been getting in?

Capaldo: Well, we are getting in. Actually we’re getting more requests
than we can even fill right now because we don’t have a full education
staff because in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" there’s a shortage of
teachers. We want to hire a certified science teacher because, again,
the credibility piece. It’s not just humane education, it’s
anti-vivisection education, so we want a science teacher to do that for
us. We get requests all the time, and we get them under ESEC and under
NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" because people
do know us as both—ESEC, the Ethical Science and Education Coalition XE
"Ethical Science and Education Coalition (ESEC)" —and NEAVS.

I think it’s not as hard as people wanted it to be, or perhaps it’s not
as hard as it used to be, because it is an issue that people want to
talk about. The Mass. Society for Medical Research XE "Massachusetts
Society for Medical Research" is going out all the time to classrooms
talking about the benefits of animal research. Because teachers want
to—no matter what side of the story they’re on—present it as critical
thinking rather than propaganda, so we get invited in. We’re in the
classrooms. We’re at, for example, Tufts XE "Tufts University"
University. We help fund an ethics professorship there. Again, it has to
be reasoned and even-sided critical thinking, but we get to go in and
talk about what it means to be an anti-vivisectionist. The classrooms
aren’t closed to us at all. There is still a thinking America here and
it is pretty much in the educational system.

In terms of alternatives, at this point certainly we’re funding other
people’s projects. That does continue to be one of the major ways in
which we will continue to offer grants. But within that, for example,
We’ve given some money to the Institute for In Vitro Sciences XE
"Institute for In Vitro Sciences (IIVS)" . They had developed the use of
cow eyeballs, eyeballs from slaughterhouse cows, as a substitute to do
cornea irritancy testing. Some of the 3-R organizations—they’re like
excited about that, and we are too. But our grant was to move away from
eyeballs and develop those multi-layer corneas which have actually been
developed. \[Tape interruption\].

(I do have to comment on that. We had to interrupt it because Stanley XE
"Stanley \[cat\]" was purring too loudly in the background. I think it’s
fitting background music for the future of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .)

So education XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "pr2" , the development
of alternatives. I think what we’d also like to see happen—greater
public awareness, but unfortunately we’re not there yet. There’s a lot
more people that have to learn a lot more about vivisection. So what
we’re constantly doing is trying to not preach to the choir. For
example, one campaign that we’re engaged in right now is an appeal to
cat XE "cats" advocates who are probably very caring people, many of
whom haven’t thought much about anti-vivisection or draw a line there.
So we’re going to be always appealing to new populations. Our history
\[brochures\]—sending them out to libraries throughout New England
because some people will, through a historic interest, be turned on to
the AV issue. So we’re always looking to bring in new populations in a
very focused way, populations that are potential allies, potential—I
don’t want to use the word converts because that sounds too
religious—but people who will get it. If we spend focused energy
bringing them the message then they’re more likely to get it than just
the general population.

We have another project planned to continue to always bring in the
historic piece because the historic piece is, I think, profound and
moving for a lot of people.

Rowe: Historic you mean the history of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .

Capaldo: The history of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" , the kind of individuals who were the founders of the
organization; who essentially were saying many of the same things that
we’re saying today.

We’re actually doing a replica of the brown dog statue from England XE
"England" that we are in the process of applying to the city \[of Boston
XE "Massachusetts:Boston" \] for a location. That may be our first
rally, our first sort of traditional animal rights rally. We’re going to
make sure that we have lots of doctors there because at the turn of the
century and the early 1900s there were lots of medical students
protesting the brown dog. In fact, they destroyed it, if you remember
that history. Well, we’re going to do a statue and it’s going to be
there and it’s going to be where people can see it. It’s not a flashy
billboard. It’s a little more in keeping with the sort of staid New
England Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" bronze statues. We’ll do some
public awareness around it, but it’s going to look different than an
animal rights rally. It’s going to look like what are all those doctors
doing in front of this dog statue? So we have ideas like that that we
think can continue to do the work the way we envision it being needed to
be done by at least one organization or at least this organization, not
that others aren’t doing it.

Excuse me XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r
"ar2" , and there’s one last piece which I think is very important.
We’ve obviously had to do a lot of hiring because we didn’t inherit much
of a staff at all. The other piece that I myself am committed to is to
do what I call bring new blood into the movement. I would say that at
this point—I think maybe sixty percent of the staff, sixty percent of
the new hires, are people new to the movement but people with a lot of
skill and experience in other areas. Like for example, our media and PR
person had done media and PR work for, I think, fourteen years in the
area in the medical community and said, “I don’t want to do this
anymore.” So she’s with us now.

I think that’s also important that organizations in the year 2000 start
to take the risk to not always just hire animal people but to bring new
people in and give them the opportunity to get up on the learning curve.
Because when a lot of the people came they didn’t know anything about
the anti-vivisection issues other than they thought it was wrong and had
finally wanted to do something about it. So that’s also another
commitment that we have, which is to help develop a strong, skilled,
professional team of staff and go out and recruit people from the
everyday world not just the animal rights world.

Rowe: Do you feel—I mean, there are three, ostensibly at least—two as
well as you—dedicated anti-vivisection societies, the NAVS XE "National
Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS)" and the AAVS XE "American
Anti-Vivisection Society (AAVS)" . When NEAVS began, it was pretty much
the only game in town.

Capaldo: We gave money to the founding of—which is the oldest of the
two, NAVS or AAVS?

Rowe: I think AAVS is the older.

Capaldo: Yes. We were doing so well there that we gave money to help
found that organization back then.

Rowe: Do you feel there needs to be consolidation? Do you feel that
there’s room for all three of you? What is the future of this coalition
of organizations, this grouping of organizations, do you think?

Capaldo: I certainly think there’s room for all three, and I think there
are similarities in some of the programs that we’re doing. I think we’re
all necessary. I think it would be nice to think about big coalitions. I
myself don’t always think they work. I think unfortunately there’s often
too much ego and too much territorial stuff. I don’t think it’s
necessary always to form big grand coalitions. I think the analogy of a
baseball team where everybody is playing a different part on the field
but you respect each other’s positions and eventually you win the game.
I’m more than happy to work with other groups. We have, we do, we will.
But myself, I’m not always convinced that coalitions are the way to go
because I think you get bogged down in the quagmire of human group
dynamics and that deters your work. I think you take three or four good
people and stick them in a room and give them the passion and give them
the resources, and they get a whole lot done.

Rowe: Would you prefer that the other groups, as it were, stay out of
New England?

Capaldo: Oh, not at all. In fact, quite the opposite. One of the things
that we talk about always is that we don’t want to be seen as just a New
England organization, because we’re not. But the way we want to have
national involvement is to bring national attention to some of the
things that are going on in the Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" , New
England area. That would mean other groups being involved. No, not at
all. Everybody is welcome.

Rowe: As an activist as well, what particular campaigns do you think are
winnable from an abolitionist point of view?

Capaldo: In the year 2000?

Rowe: Well, not—hey, in the year 2000 but in the next few years that
need to be focused on, not necessarily just by NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" but generally within the animal
advocacy as a whole. But something that you would think as an
anti-vivisectionist that would be—there’d be something if the gathering
of the clan could be together, or however it would be done, could be
winnable.

Capaldo: Any issues? Not just vivisection?

Rowe: Not just vivisection, but as an anti-vivisectionist that will be
of interest, I think, as well.

Capaldo: The first one that came into my mind when you said that were
elephants in circuses XE "circuses" \\r "dog5" . I think that’s
something that time is ticking away before that ends XE "elephants" \\r
"dog5" . I think those kinds of issues—issues where there are what we
might call socially important species XE "dogs" \\r "dog5" , species
that people really can understand and gravitate towards XE "pigs" \\r
"dog5" . I don’t see anything wrong with starting there XE "rodents" \\r
"dog5" . I think eventually we’ll get to rats and mice and guinea pigs
and everybody else XE "primates:chimpanzees" \\r "dog5" . I think that
has a lot of potential XE "animal pounds:pound seizure" \\r "dog5" .

I think the whole chimpanzee issue in animal research is “what’s
happening XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "dog5" .” I think
toxicity testing—I think that’s something also because of scientific
advancements that that’s coming to an end. We’re not going to have to
use animals. Its clock is ticking. I think the use of animals in
education, some of the intrusive and scientific uses of animals in
education—I think that clock is ticking. Those are four or five big ones
within anti-vivisection that begin to, again, create a domino effect in
attitudes, that if you can do away with it here then why not here? Why
not there? I think, for example, the use of dogs in research. There
aren’t that many dogs that are being used now. Again, they’re
substituting often pigs, for example. But I think those species that
people can relate to—and I’m not sure that’s a bad strategy to focus on
specific animals and then again help people make the empathic leap
between that animal and that animal.

Pound seizure is something that I think across the United States its
time has come. I don’t know how many states right now have repealed the
pound seizure law.

Rowe: Do you feel—I’m actually going to stop this right here and then
we’ll move on to the next tape.

Capaldo: And maternal deprivation studies. That’s the big one I wanted
to mention.

\[End Tape 2, Side B; Begin Tape 3, Side A\]

Rowe: So you mentioned maternal deprivation experiments. Of any animal
particularly? Maternal deprivation of—

Capaldo: I think of any animal. Some of the maternal deprivation stuff I
remember as an undergraduate that they did with rats was pretty
horrific. I think there are specific categories of research that are
winnable, that are very winnable.

Rowe: I’d be interested in your take XE "xenotransplantation" \\r
"xeno1" , given that future is also concerning farm animals, PHARM,
biotechnologies, transplantation. What should be the strategy—any
particular strategies that should be used for dealing with that emerging
and probably increasing industry of using animals as repositories for
human organs, et cetera?

Capaldo: I think if we had—if we had the support of other kinds of
organizations that weren’t necessarily animal organizations but health
organizations to take a look at something like how do we as a culture
and as a society advocate for human organ donation. I think if we could
get behind that and put some impetus behind that, we would start to see
the economic gain of creating harvesting fields, where somebody is going
to get rich by creating animal donors, start to wane. I think that could
take a huge bite out of that looming threat, that looming threat to
animals. That’s do-able, given what other countries have done.

Rowe: Are you reaching out to virologists in this regard? You’re
reaching out to those who have deep reservations about the
transplantation of foreign cultures into a human body?

Capaldo: We haven’t done that, but we do know of organizations like the
Campaign for Responsible Transplantation XE "Campaign for Responsible
Transplantation" that really is doing very good work around helping
people understand the dangers. That’s what could win that, is not,
again, the ethical argument but the narcissistic argument of: “Do you
really want to take that risk?” I don’t know if you saw the recent
documentary on that on TV that was pretty upsetting, because they acted
dismissively of the theory that AIDS is a zoonotic disease. They acted
as if that was like a tiny little blurp on the radar screen, not paying
it much mind. They actually presented it as—

Rowe: Zoonotic means specific to one species?

Capaldo: No, a disease of animals transmissible to humans. The green
monkey? They were storing polio vaccines, et cetera, et cetera. But they
mentioned that in this huge thing where they show these individuals who
are waiting for the transplant, you know, heart-wrenching stories—my
only son, my husband and father of four children, et cetera, et cetera.
And that’s where the education has to happen. The education XE
"education" has to happen around, again, fighting the propaganda that is
saying this is good for you. That’s the biggest hurdle right now and
that’s the other piece that, I think, NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" has to commit to, which is to fight
the propaganda machine XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "pr3" . It’s
not even you’re fighting science XE "science/scientific community" \\r
"pr3" . I guess we’ve been talking the last hour, hour and a half, about
the scientists XE "medicine/medical community" \\r "pr3" , the
scientists XE "business corporations" \\r "pr3" , the scientists, and it
really is the propaganda machine, the propaganda machine.

Rowe: Of the biomedical industry.

Capaldo: Of the biomedical industry. That’s where we need to focus some
attention because—

Rowe: The money invested in that community.

Capaldo:—that’s how we’ll lose. That’s where and how we could lose, is
if they continue to gain momentum and we continue to not be able to get
the message out.

Rowe: Okay. I’m going to call an end to this interview.

\[End of Session\].

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

INDEX \\h " " \\c "1" \\e " "

American Anti-Vivisection Society (AAVS) 31, 44

American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) 10

Amory, Cleveland 14, 24, 25, 27, 28, 33–35, 37, 38

Angell, George T. 14

animal dealers

puppy mills 6

animal experimentation and testing 4–5, 15–17, 20–21, 28–30, 31–33,
36–37, 40–41, 45–46

alternatives 19–20, 30, 42–43

Animal Liberation \[book\] 11

Animal Liberation Front (ALF) 18, 21

animal pounds

pound seizure 15–17, 22, 45–46

Animal Rescue League 22, 23

animal rescues 7–8

animal rights movement/animal protection community 22–24, 31, 39–40,
44–45

Association of the Bar of the City of New York 38

Babyface \[cow\] 4, 13

Bok, Derek 30

Boston Public Library 33

Boston University 13

Boston Women’s Health Collective 12

business corporations 47

California

Davis 32

Campaign for Responsible Transplantation 46

campaigning/lobbying 15–17

Capaldo, Diodato \[father\] 1–5

Capaldo, Ernie \[uncle\] 5

Capaldo, Josephine \[mother\] 1–5, 8

cats 43

Cavalier, Debra Higgins 42

Center for Captive Chimpanzee Care (CCCC) 45

Center for Risk Assessment 27

Charles River Laboratories 16, 17, 42

children and animals 3, 6–7, 42

circuses 45–46

Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE) 23, 24

Council for Compassionate Governance 26

Cramer, Marjorie 36, 37, 41

Curren, Rodger 29

dogs 2–4, 7–8, 16, 22, 29, 45–46

E \[magazine\] 43

Earth Day 12

economics 30

education 24–25, 42–43, 47

Edwards, Gertrude 4–7

Ekwall, Björn 19, 24, 29, 41

elephants 45–46

England 43

Environmental Experiments on Animals \[book\] 31

environmental issues/environmental movement 11–12

Essex County Training School 8

Ethical Science and Education Coalition (ESEC) 42

ethics and morality 28–31, 39–41

Farnum, George 14, 18, 34

feminism 12

Florida 45

Ford, Robert 15, 18, 21, 22, 24, 34–37

Fox, Michael W. 47

Francione, Gary 24

Fund for Animals 14, 35

funding/finance 19–20, 24–25, 29

fur 40

Ganas, Jessica 45

Gennarelli, Thomas 32

Greek, C. Ray 29, 36, 41

Greek, Jean Swingle 29

Greene, Joseph 14

Greenpeace 11

Greer, Germaine 12

Grey2K (Greyhound Racing Ends in Year 2000) 22

greyhound racing 22

Gypsy \[dog\] 4

Harlow, Harry 32

Harvard Medical School 36

Harvard University 1, 7, 16, 17, 41

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 25, 31

Institute for In Vitro Sciences (IIVS) 29, 43

Italy 1, 5

Jerom \[chimpanzee\] 45

Kenya 45

laboratory animals 15–18, 29

Laboratory Primate Advocacy Group (LPAG) 45

Larson, Sandra 23, 25, 27

law and legislation 15–17, 21–22

Lindner, Lorin 9

Living Tissue \[magazine\] 4

LivingEarth Learning Project 25, 27

managing an organization 18–19, 23–29

Massachusetts 1, 12, 16, 18, 22, 23, 42

Andover 1

Boston 1, 11, 17, 21, 26, 30–36, 43, 45

Lawrence 1, 4

Methuen 1

Southborough 15

Massachusetts Department of Public Health 28

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 17

Massachusetts Society for Medical Research 42

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)
11, 14, 22, 23

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children 10

Massachusetts Teachers Association 27

McArdle, John 31

medicine/medical community 20–21, 31–33, 38–39, 40–41, 47

Medlock, Aaron 11, 15, 25, 31

Mobilization for Animals 11, 15, 17, 20, 21, 32

National Alliance Conferences 24

National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS) 44

National Enquirer 6, 7, 20

National Institutes of Health (NIH) 36

National Research Center 21

New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS) 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 14–31,
34–43, 45, 47

New England Regional Primate Center 15

New York 38

New York City 4

New York Philharmonic 4

New York Times 19, 20

Newkirk, Ingrid 17, 24

Newsweek 19, 20

Noon, Carole 45

O’Neil, John 34

Pacheco, Alex 24, 37

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 26, 37

Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM) 24

Pickett, Annette 17

pigs 45–46

Primate \[film\] 45

primates 32

baboons 45

chimpanzees 45–46

monkeys 21

psychological aspects 6–7, 9, 14, 16–17, 29–33

Psychology Experiments on Animals \[book\] 31

public relations/outreach 20–21, 43–44, 47

Red \[dog\] 4, 5

Reines, Brandon 31

Reverence for Life \[magazine\] 4, 10, 15

rodents 45–46

Rutgers Animal Law Clinic 24

Sacred Cows and Golden Geese: The Human Cost of Experiments on Animals
36

science/scientific community 27, 29–33, 38–39, 40–41, 47

Silver Spring monkeys 18, 21, 32

Singer, Peter 14

Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (New York) 10

Sons of Italy 2

Spira, Henry 19, 23, 24

Spottie \[dog\] 4

Stanley \[cat\] 41, 43

Stathos, Margaret Moreland 4, 25

Stephens, Marty 31

Strickland, Joseph 18, 20

Superpigs and Wondercorn: The Brave New World of Biotechnology and Where
It All May Lead 47

Sweden 24

Tanzania 45

Taub, Edward 32

Tufts University 23, 29, 40, 42

veal calves 4

vegetarianism 13, 17

veterinary medicine 9

Vietnam War 19

violence towards animals and humans 9–10

Washington, DC 26

Weiss, Rachel 45

West Virginia 22

Wilson, Mary Ellen 10

Wisconsin

Madison 32

Wiseman, Frederick 45

World Week for Animals in Labs (WWAIL) 45

xenotransplantation 46–47
