---
---

This edited transcript is the product of tape-recorded interviews
conducted by Martin Rowe with Robert Cummings in Boston, Massachusetts
on December 4, 1999 and April 28, 2000 for Recording Animal Advocacy.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 - December 4, 1999

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

1

Childhood interests in animals – Working as primary lawyer of law firm’s
MSPCA account early in legal career – MSPCA President Eric Hanson
devised a way of not surrendering dogs at MSPCA to Harvard University
for research purposes – Publicizing animal cruelty problems instead of
using the law; the issue of punishment and criminal justice in animal
cruelty cases – Society today much more conscious of animal welfare than
40 years ago – Involvement with International Society for the Protection
of Animals (ISPA) / World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA);
ISPA’s operation in Surinam in 1964 to rescue animals from floods –
Approaching corporations for donations – MSPCA shelters in Nantucket and
Brockton.

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

More on Brockton shelter and on planning a shelter; fundraising for a
shelter as a way of increasing community awareness of animal issues –
Brian Davies’ fundraising and publicity campaigns to stop seal hunts –
Taking middle-of-the-road instead of absolutist positions in vivisection
and other animal-related concerns – Difficulty in having a dialogue with
the medical research community – Working with

and its President George Farnum – Characteristics of donors – Broadening
the MSPCA board – Caring for animals from other states – Dealing with
horse abusers by giving them the choice of never having horses – Best
not to transport any live farm animals; Middle Eastern countries
insisting on obtaining live sheep from abroad – Slaughtering of animals
in the Jewish and Muslim traditions.

Session 2 – April 28, 2000

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

Studies on childhood cruelty towards animals in criminals; the judicial
system’s handling of animal cruelty cases – Goal as chairman of MSPCA
board: having diversification on the board and concentrating on
financial aspects of the organization – MSPCA could have done more
humane education and public outreach; using direct mail to educate –
Future MSPCA activities: upgrading shelters, continuing leg-hold traps
campaign, serving the entire state, undertaking public relations and
educational campaigns at every level – Progress has been made in
society’s treatment of animals over the decades – Violence to animals
and humans in prison rodeos.

\[Tape 2, Side B\] . . . . .

More on violence in prison rodeos.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

December 4, 1999

Boston, Massachusetts - Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals

Session of 1-1/2 hour

April 28, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts - Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals

Session of 3/4 hour

Interviewer:

Martin Rowe (author, editor, publisher)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was sent to Cummings; no corrections were made. Lee
prepared the introductory material and index.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Robert Cummings received his A.B. from Brown University and Tufts
College in 1952 and his LL.B. from Harvard University in 1955. After
leaving in the United States Army in 1957, he joined the prominent
Boston law firm which is now named Nixon Peabody LLP. The focus of his
law practice is on public utilities law, general corporate law,
non-profits, and litigation. He has been a managing partner of the firm
for many years, and has served on the boards of various community
organizations.

Cummings has been actively associated with the Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA) for over forty years, an
involvement which started when he acted as a primary lawyer of the law
firm’s MSPCA account early in his legal career. He is currently the
Chairman of the MSPCA’s Board of Directors. He is also the Director and
Treasurer of the World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA), an
organization which was formed in 1956 by the MSPCA and Royal Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals in the UK. The particular roles he
has played in these organizations and his legal background have given
him insights into different areas of animal protection including: legal
and criminal aspects of animal cruelty; fundraising; publicity,
outreach, and education; overseas projects; animal shelters;
vivisection; and transport and slaughter of animals.

Robert Cummings

Session \#1

December 4, 1999

Boston, Massachusetts

Martin Rowe, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Rowe: I’m going to ask you a sort of general question about how you
became interested in animals, your life growing up, whether you had
companion animals, some stories about your feelings about animals. So
tell us about how you became interested in animals.

Cummings: We always did have companion animals when I was growing up —
cats and dogs, the occasional snake and other sorts of creatures.

Rowe: You kept these snakes XE "snakes" or you rescued them or you
bought them?

Cummings: No. I came home from summer camp when I was a kid — it was a
Boy Scout camp — and brought a snake that we had found, a little garter
snake. It crept away. It got away and gave birth to a bunch of snakes.
For a while we had a house sort of crawling with little snakes. We never
found — what I did was reintroduce them to, not the wild because we
hardly lived in the wild, but we sort of let them get back into their
own environment. That was — I’m not a great — I’m not like Walter XE
"Kilroy, Walter" Kilroy. I’m not into snakes in a great way. Walter is.
If you’ve talked with him at all you know he’s very much a herpetist, as
they say. I don’t have any dislike of snakes but I don’t have any great
affection for them.

No. We always had cats and dogs. I had a dog when I was growing up as a
kid that was very close to me, and \[I\] always had a great affinity and
liking for animals but without any great interest beyond having them as
companions.

Rowe: Do your parents like animals as well?

Cummings: Oh, sure.

Rowe: They were welcoming of —

Cummings: Sure. Well, you didn’t keep dogs and cats around the house
unless the parents like them. My parents liked animals very much, too.
We didn’t have a lot of animals. We normally had one dog and one cat at
a time. When I really became interested in the humane work was when I
started doing legal work for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and became quite close to the
then-president of the MSPCA, Eric XE "Hanson, Eric" Hanson, and became
interested in the work that was being done well beyond just the legal
procedures that I had to apply to the job.

Rowe: How did you become interested in that work? How did you find out
about it? How did you approach the president?

Cummings: Well, it was — this firm now has — there’s somewhere between
450 and 500 lawyers, but in those days there were twelve lawyers. The
lawyer who was handling the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" account was getting along in
years. He started using me to help him with some of the work.

Rowe: So the MSPCA had your firm on its books, as it were, for several
years.

Cummings: Right. It had been a client of the firm for many, many years
before I joined the firm. I don’t know this, but I think the way it
became a client is that the second president of the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
, Francis Rowley XE "Rowley, Francis" , was the father of an individual
who became a partner in this firm, Charlie Rowley XE "Rowley, Charlie" .
I suspect that that’s the way the firm first came to represent the MSPCA
XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" .

Rowe: What was the name of the firm in those days?

Cummings: Peabody, Brown, Rowley & Story XE "Peabody, Brown, Rowley &
Story" \[phonetic\].

Rowe: Okay. So you were involved in this or you were brought in. Was it
an active request on your behalf to become —

Cummings: No. I started work here a couple of days after I was
discharged from the army. I had —

Rowe: That was in 1957.

Cummings: Fifty-seven. I had been hired in September really, so they
knew I was coming and they just had a pile of work for me to do. Some of
the work that I was assigned to do involved the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . I’m trying
to — I can’t remember exactly what it was, but I started life as a trial
lawyer. Today they call them litigators; then we were called trial
lawyers. I think it might have been in connection with a will contest,
but I’m not sure. But just in connection with the work I was doing, I
was working very directly often with the president of the Society.
Although he was a good deal older than I — he probably wasn’t as old as
I am now — nonetheless, he liked me and he asked that I become the
primary lawyer for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . This was somewhat
flattering. I was a pretty young lawyer in those days.

Rowe: Now, is it flattering because you would be the head lawyer or was
it flattering because this was a major account for you?

Cummings: Oh, no, it was just flattering to me. It was flattering
because he had enough confidence in me to want me to be the head lawyer
or the head of the big account. That was not an element. I was just
flattered that Eric XE "Hanson, Eric" thought enough of my abilities to
want me at a pretty tender age to be the primary lawyer.

Rowe: Up until that point, are you aware of the kinds of cases that your
company had been dealing with in regards to the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ? What was the
sort of general type of case that Peabody was dealing with in regards to
the MSPCA?

Cummings: I started working with the MSPCA so early on in my career with
the firm that I knew nothing about the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" really except for the
fact that it operated Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital"
Memorial Animal Hospital. I really didn’t know the depth of the MSPCA’s
work, involvement, or activities.

Rowe: Okay. Had you had contact with the animal hospital at all? Had you
had cause to take any companion animals there?

Cummings: No. We always had our animals cared for by local
veterinarians.

Rowe: Had you formed any opinion about the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" or its work at
that point?

Cummings: Well, I was familiar with the reputation of Angell XE "Angell
Memorial Animal Hospital" Memorial Animal Hospital, but I had no idea as
to the effectiveness of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" as a humane organization.

Rowe: And your opinion — the opinion about the hospital was very high.

Cummings: Oh, yes. It has and has always had an extremely high
reputation as an animal hospital.

Rowe: What were the kinds of cases that you began dealing with in the
late 50s when it came to the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ?

Cummings: Well, it wasn’t all cases. Like in any large organization that
owns significant amounts of property, there are real estate problems
that you have to deal with from a legal standpoint. The law enforcement
department needs a lot of advice from a criminal standpoint. There are a
number of bequests that are left to an organization like this and you
need legal advice in reviewing the terms of some of the bequests and
thus the occasional will contest. Then there are legislative advice that
you run into. Sometimes there are some fascinating litigation that one
gets involved in. I think one of the early ones that I was involved in,
but only peripherally really, was a case that we fought into the
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court on the pound seizure law that was
passed in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" . Are you familiar with the
pound seizure law XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper1" ?

Rowe: I’m familiar with the pound seizure XE "pound seizure" \\r
“exper1” law, yes. I know that Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" Kilroy — and
readers of this document will refer to the Walter Kilroy interview — was
saying that MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" was heavily involved with pound seizure
issues in the late 1950s. He indicated that he had actually come to your
company and asked something like thirty-one questions in regard to not
just this issue but other legal issues. When you are talking about the
case in regards to the pound seizure law, were you talking about the
period of the late 50s?

Cummings: Right.

Rowe: Why don’t you just go into some detail about the link between your
firm and the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" in framing a legal understanding of how to
go about stopping pound seizures?

Cummings: We, together with the Animal Rescue League XE "Animal Rescue
League" , challenged the constitutionality of the pound seizure law in
the courts. Without getting into the procedure, the case got into the
Supreme Court very quickly. I think it was already in the Supreme Court
and it was pending hearing when I joined the firm. I’m not sure. I do
know I did some of the research that went into the brief. I didn’t argue
the case. It was very early on. Another law firm in Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" , Wilkes & Gray \[phonetic\] — no, I think Wilkes
& Gray disqualified themselves because they also represented Harvard
University XE "Harvard University" , so it wasn’t Wilkes & Gray XE
"Wilkes & Gray" . I’ve forgotten what the other firm was.

Rowe: That would mean that they had a conflict of interest because of
the experimentation at Harvard University XE "Harvard University" .

Cummings: Right. So we tried just about every theory of law that we
could under both the Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" and the United
States constitutions.

Rowe: Can you provide some summaries of your approaches?

Cummings: Basically, we tried to claim that the animals that were being
seized — this was the thrust of the case as I remember it; we had a
number of issues that we raised — but the thrust of the issue was that
the animals constituted private property that were being taken without
compensation. The decision held that the animals that we were talking
about were stray animals and nobody had a property interest in them.

Rowe: That was the countervailing argument.

Cummings: Yes. And that was the one that the court bought. It was a
valiant effort, but it failed.

Rowe: Did you think that was the most, the strongest argument, in
retrospect, that could have been used?

Cummings: I think if you want to talk about it from a pure legal
standpoint and on the precedent that was argued, I think it was a
correct decision. I think the issue of pound seizure was not a legal
one; it was a political issue really. We did everything we could, of
course, to defeat it politically, and having failed that we tried from a
legal standpoint.

Rowe: How were you involved in the efforts to defeat it politically as a
law firm?

Cummings: I wasn’t. No, this was before I started.

Rowe: Prior to your joining.

Cummings: The answer to the whole thing was very interesting. When the
law was enacted there was a — and we challenged it — there was an
agreement that was made.

Rowe: The law that was enacted when?

Cummings: Oh, sometime in the — if I had to guess I would say probably
’55, ’56. We had an agreement with Harvard University XE "Harvard
University" , acting for all the research institutions, that they
wouldn’t levy on us for animals until the case was decided. I remember
Dr. Trumm XE "Trumm, \_\_\_\_\_\_" \[phonetic\] was the —

Rowe: What do you mean by levy and who was us? The MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
?

Cummings: The MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" or any humane organization.

Rowe: So they wouldn’t — what do you mean by levy?

Cummings: They wouldn’t come and demand that we turn dogs over to them.
So just after the decision was written, this Dr. Trumm XE "Trumm,
\_\_\_\_\_\_" wrote to Eric XE "Hanson, Eric" Hanson and said that now
that the case has been decided, please be advised that our agreement has
come to an end and we’re going to feel free to come over and requisition
dogs from you. So we had a big meeting in Eric XE "Hanson, Eric"
Hanson’s office. I’ll never forget the meeting for a couple of reasons.
One was that I thought I was coming down with something. I was sitting
in Eric XE "Hanson, Eric" ’s office with a bunch of his staff people,
and I noticed that the office seemed to be tipping back and forth a
little bit. The office didn’t seem very stable. I concluded that the
office probably was pretty stable and there was something wrong with me.
After the conference I went home and went to bed and found I had
pneumonia.

But I had come up with some legal ways to avoid turning the dogs over to
the research institutions.

Rowe: Can we just go back? I would like to know — you know, you as an
animal lover and you’d lost this case and they had indicated that they
were going to come and take the dogs from the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , how did you
feel about that and how did that match up with separating the emotion
away from “let’s determine what are the legal recourses that we can
have”? And I’d like you then to detail the legal recourses that you
responded to in that case.

Cummings: Well, if you’re a good lawyer and you feel that you’re so
emotionally involved in the subject that you can’t think objectively,
you disqualify yourself. If I hadn’t thought that I could act
objectively and as a lawyer in this situation, I would have said, “Eric
XE "Hanson, Eric" , we’ve got to get somebody else to deal with this.”
This is something I think any good professional person does. If he or
she cannot separate the emotional involvement from the advice that
you’re giving to a client, you shouldn’t be giving the advice. It’s the
reason that you don’t do your own legal work. It’s the reason a doctor
doesn’t practice on his own family and so forth. So I would have to say
that if I had thought of it not as a lawyer, I’d have been violently
opposed to turning an animal over to a research institute. As a lawyer I
had to figure out a way legally not to do it.

Well, let me tell you what we finally did. I had devised a way around
this that would have maybe worked, maybe not. If they had wanted — they
being the research institutions — had wanted to challenge it, they might
have been able to get around it. In any event, we were discussing how to
implement this. Right in the middle of the discussion Eric XE "Hanson,
Eric" Hanson said — I’m a strong admirer of Hanson — he said, “I’m not
at all interested in doing it this way.” He said, “Bob has come up with
a good legal solution and we could try this out. I’ll tell you exactly
what I’m going to do.” He said, “I’m going to notify Trumm XE "Trumm,
\_\_\_\_\_\_" that so long as I am president of the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
I am not going to allow any animal to be turned over to a research
institution, period. Now, this means I will be in violation of the law.”
He turned to me and he said, “Can they put me in jail for this?” I said,
“Yes, they can, Eric XE "Hanson, Eric" , if they want to.” I said,
“They’d have to go through some steps, but you could end up in a jail
cell.” He said, “The best thing that could happen would be for me to be
arrested. The best thing — I just hope they come.”

That was the end of that, and he notified Trumm XE "Trumm, \_\_\_\_\_\_"
. And we’ve never had an animal touched. I think the research
institutions saw that the best thing for us would have been for them to
try to arrest Eric XE "Hanson, Eric" Hanson. It would have given them
horrible publicity. It would have given — it would have really focused
the public on what we were doing and why we were doing it. It would have
been probably a devastating blow to them. It was just exactly the right
thing to do. It wasn’t the legal thing. You can’t advise a client to
break the law, but it was a perfect solution. So I said, “That’s a great
idea, Eric XE "Hanson, Eric" ,” and I went home and went to bed for two
weeks. \[Laughter\].

Rowe: I can imagine. Now, whilst for the next couple of decades, because
there was another law enacted in 1980 — in the early 1980s, I believe —
which further enforced the law against pound seizures and using
companion animals off the streets. Clearly there was still this kind of
taking of companion animals and placing them in experimental labs, maybe
not from the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" .

Cummings: I am not familiar with where they were getting and how they
were getting the animals. I don’t — I just don’t know. They certainly
weren’t getting them from us and I’m sure they weren’t getting them from
the Animal Rescue League XE "Animal Rescue League" and I doubt that they
were getting them from any of the other humane organizations in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" .

Rowe: Do you know of any legal attempts to stop that in the next few
decades?

Cummings: No. I think in Massachusetts, from a legal standpoint, you’d
be wasting your time. I think that the law is a very expensive, slow,
and cumbersome way to deal with most of these problems that are
basically political problems. I’ve become a believer over the years that
the best thing you can do in the humane movement is to do whatever you
can to publicize the problems that we see. It’s kind of the broad
heading of humane education.

But I think most of the cruelties that are visited upon animals are done
more by neglect than by evil people and that most of the bad things that
happen to animals happen because people either don’t want to know about
it or about them or that they are ignorant of them. So you have
something like pound seizure. If you can get the message across as to
why pound seizure is a very cruel instrument to use in order to get
animals for experimentation — whether you’re in favor of animal
experimentation or not, it’s a very cruel way to get the animals. I
don’t think it can survive. Politicians go on polls and they go on
pressures, as you can see more and more and more. Sad to say, many of
legislators don’t have strong convictions. But constituents lean on them
and they bend. So if you can educate your constituents and get them to
lean on the legislature, you can do a lot.

Rowe: In the early 60s Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" Kilroy came to you
with these questions, which we will be talking about in his second
interview, to ask about law enforcement — how these laws and penalties
could somehow fit the crime. He was very critical of the way that the
legal system has failed to in any way match the severity of the crime
with the severity of punishment. Can you tell us how you responded to
his concerns about punishment and those issues?

Cummings: Thirty years ago? I don’t have — I can’t remember —

Rowe: Actually forty years ago — but not the specifics, more the general
message that you have kind of articulated here that legislation is
important but also the judicial punishment system, how you as a lawyer
advise animal welfare cases that are brought to you and brought to
court, how you advise going about prosecuting them and generally trying
to get higher punishments.

Cummings: Well, you don’t have much of an option, Martin. The statutes
provide a specific punishment for a specific crime. A prosecutor, once a
case is won, can only ask the sentencing authority for a severe
punishment within the — when a statute provides that a person can be
sentenced to one year in jail or \$1,000 fine or both, and you say that
you suggest that the judge impose a \$1,000 fine and give the defendant
a year in jail, then it’s up to the judge. The judge in sentencing takes
into account the previous criminal record and the severity and so forth
and so on and makes the decision based on the record. So there isn’t
much advice you can give because it’s all a statutory —

Rowe: It’s all statutory.

Cummings: You can lobby, and this has been successful in some instances
in some jurisdictions, to make animal cruelty cases a felony rather than
a misdemeanor and impose a greater penalty on the defendants. The whole
question of criminal justice and the imposition of penalties and what
you accomplish in a humane organization or in almost any organization is
a question that you could write volumes about. Are you trying to educate
people? Are you trying to punish them? Are you trying to deter them from
committing crimes? Are you trying to send a message to the rest of the
community as to how activity like this is to be treated?

Rowe: I guess, judging from your previous statement, that you believe
that the fundamental aim should be education, or do you think it differs
from particular types of crime?

Cummings: Well, some of the crimes you’re talking about — if you talk to
any of our law enforcement people — in many, many instances you’re
dealing with sick people. These are people that —

Rowe: When you say sick you mean clinically sick or you mean they’re
just perverse?

Cummings: Perverse XE "violence towards animals and humans" . You’ve
heard of the studies that have been done. There have been a couple of
studies done now on the correlation between people who are cruel to
animals and end up committing violent crimes against people. You have a
whole variety of people. You’ve heard of the people, of course, that
have 600 cats in a small house. This is not an uncommon occurrence
anyplace. These people have distinct mental problems. They don’t have a
— they like the cats. They love the cats. They don’t realize they’re
being very cruel to the animals. They think they’re giving them shelter
and they’re being good to them. In fact, it’s quite inhumane to keep
them all cooped up in a space like this. These are not normal people.
People who torture animals are not normal people.

If you’re just seeking revenge, you’d like to see the people who torture
animals incarcerated for a long, long time as punishment for what they
do. You could incarcerate some of these people forever and they’d come
out and they’d commit crimes against animals or against people. There
are certain people that if you want to protect society from, then the
only way you can do it is to lock them up XE "law and legislation" \\r
"law1" .

Rowe: Now, those types of cases when they have come before the courts,
have you felt that even if the punishments for those kinds of cases are
statutory that the judges, et cetera, have enforced those adequately or
not?

Cummings: I don’t know what you mean by adequately, Martin.

Rowe: Well, adequately to the extent that you feel that the maximum
statutory requirements have been met.

Cummings: Well, I’d just answer that very broadly by saying that when I
first got into the humane movement, the courts and the police didn’t
take animal cruelty cases very seriously. I think today there is a
tendency by the courts and by the police to take these cases much more
seriously, I think. Not every judge, but many judges will impose a
maximum penalty whereas thirty or forty years ago they might not have.

Rowe: Why do you think that’s the case?

Cummings: I think it’s partly a social consciousness level being raised.
I think in general the attitude — some people would disagree with me —
but I think in general, certainly in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" ,
the attitude towards animals or the awareness, I think, of the fact that
we have to share the world with animals is much keener.

Rowe: Can I just stop there? How do you think that consciousness has
been raised?

Cummings: Oh, I think it’s mostly because of the great publicity that’s
been given by the animal welfare movement to things.

Rowe: Is there anything particular that struck you as being a great
contributor in your forty years of being involved with this, any moments
that you feel or books or things that struck you as being the kinds of
things that inspired you or just generally lifted society’s awareness a
bit?

Cummings: No, I’ve never needed any more inspiration than I get just
from being part of it, Martin. I don’t think there’s been any one
incident, event, or book. I think it’s an accumulation of things. You
notice the younger people are much more into animal welfare issues today
than they were forty years ago. I don’t know why. I’m not exactly sure.
I think our level of social consciousness in general has been raised a
good deal. During my lifetime the social consciousness was not very high
when I was a kid.

Rowe: Are you referring to things like the civil rights movement, the
women’s movement?

Cummings: Sure.

Rowe: The animal rights movement is part of a movement of raising
consciousness.

Cummings: Sure. My kids wince whenever I mention this, but I was brought
up during the Depression XE "Great Depression" . During those days you
pretty much concentrated on staying alive, getting enough food on the
table. Then the next event that came along was World War II XE "World
War II" . We were totally consumed as a country with World War II. As a
kid during World War II, that was the only that mattered — was winning
the war. Then you came into the 50s following the war and people were
just so happy to get back from the war and get back to school and start
families and so forth that it took us a while.

Then you get into the 60s and all of a sudden people awaken to the fact
that there’s a whole world out there that we have to address. I think
that made a difference. Along with the civil rights and social
consciousness and so forth, I think an awareness of the humane movement
was a part XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "ar1" . A lot of people
found that they liked working and doing humane work and they liked
working with animals as well as they did just working on people projects
XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r "ar1" .

Rowe: Were you concerned to broaden your professional — it would be your
personal interest and professional interest — beyond the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
into other animal advocacy and humane welfare groups?

Cummings: I did become involved and am still deeply involved in the
World Society for the Protection of Animals. It was then the — when I
became involved — the International Society for the Protection of
Animals \[ISPA XE "International Society for the Protection of Animals
(ISPA)" \], which is one of the organizations that formed WSPA XE "World
Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" .

Rowe: Right. That was in 1956 the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" joined up with the RSPCA
XE "Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA)" to
form ISPA XE "International Society for the Protection of Animals
(ISPA)" .

Cummings: It was ’56 or ’59.

Rowe: It’s ’56. I have it written down from the website. In 1959 — there
was then a further consolidation in 1981 with the WSPA XE "World Society
for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" . What has been your involvement
with the WSPA?

Cummings: I’m treasurer of the WSPA XE "World Society for the Protection
of Animals (WSPA)" . I’m a member of the board. I’m on the executive
committee. I’m chairman of the nominating committee.

Rowe: What have been your particular interests in the work of the WSPA?

Cummings: Oh, gee. Particular interests? I’d just say I’ve been involved
at the board level with the work of WSPA XE "World Society for the
Protection of Animals (WSPA)" and ISPA XE "International Society for the
Protection of Animals (ISPA)" since certainly 1960, just in general.

Rowe: Protecting endangered species, conserving wildlife, concerning
habitat protection, international laws on animal welfare around the
world.

Cummings: Well, more than that. We also do a lot of field work. We run
some rescue work. We’ve done some jungle evacuations when dams have
flooded sections of the jungle in South America and Central America XE
"animal rescues" \\r "rescue1" .

Rowe: In 1964 Operation Gwamba XE "Operation Gwamba" in Surinam XE
"Surinam" . You were involved with that?

Cummings: Sure XE "wildlife" \\r "rescue1" .

Rowe: How were you involved with that?

Cummings: I did a lot of the — I consulted a lot with Eric XE "Hanson,
Eric" Hanson and John XE "Walsh, John" Walsh about some of the problems
that you — legal problems — that you might encounter in running a rescue
operation using foreign help.

Rowe: What might be those problems?

Cummings: You’ve got the usual problems of employing people. You’ve got
the questions of working in a foreign country. You’ve got liability
questions with people coming down to work with you. Most of these things
you solve with insurance. We did that. John XE "Walsh, John" Walsh who
did it was on the payroll of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . He wasn’t on ISPA XE
"International Society for the Protection of Animals (ISPA)" ’s payroll
at that time. So we had to view him as an employee and what were our
obligations to him and so forth and so on.

Rowe: How did the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" get involved in this particular project? Why
did this come to the MSPCA’s attention and why did the MSPCA feel that
it had to be involved, even through ISPA?

Cummings: ISPA XE "International Society for the Protection of Animals
(ISPA)" was a creature of the Royal Society XE "Royal Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA)" and the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
and was funded entirely by those two organizations and some outside
funding. But without the funding provided by those two organizations it
wouldn’t have been able to sustain itself. It had very little manpower.
There was one fellow, Trevor Scott XE "Scott, Trevor" , who worked in
the office in London XE "England:London" and another fellow, Colin Plant
XE "Plant, Colin" , who worked with him. John XE "Walsh, John" Walsh was
working for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . We were asked to do this. There was nobody
in this hemisphere who could do it.

Rowe: You were asked by these people in ISPA XE "International Society
for the Protection of Animals (ISPA)" ?

Cummings: No. Somebody from Surinam XE "Surinam" got in touch. I’m not
sure exactly who. So John XE "Walsh, John" — I don’t know if John
volunteered — he probably volunteered — or whether Eric XE "Hanson,
Eric" asked him to do it, and we sent him down there to do the project.
And ISPA XE "International Society for the Protection of Animals (ISPA)"
in those days had no other resources, no way of doing it. We had the
resources so we used them.

There still is a very close relationship between the Mass. SPCA and WSPA
XE "World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" . We’ve had our
veterinarians from Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" go off on
rescue missions with WSPA people. The hospital is a great resource for
WSPA to use with regard to determining what sort of drugs can be sent to
different countries and whatnot.

Rowe: This was a hell of a logistical task. I mean, there were 9,737
animals, presumably large wildlife. How did this logistical exercise
work?

Cummings: Well, first of all, John XE "Walsh, John" Walsh went down and
recruited a bunch of Indians, local people, called — no, I guess in
Panama XE "Panama" they’re called Suni \[phonetic\]. I’ve forgotten what
they are, but they’re an indigenous group. John XE "Walsh, John" was
kind of learning as he went along. What they’d do, they’d get a bunch of
canoes and a bunch of Indians, and as the jungle floods it creates
islands. It’s not just a flat surface. They’d go onto these little
islands and they’d rescue all the animals. Some they tranquilized. They
had the tranquilizer, otherwise you’d never get —

Rowe: What kind of animals were they?

Cummings: Oh, you name it. They had jaguars, they had little deer — oh,
any animal that you can think of that inhabits the rainforest — snakes.
The only things they didn’t save, they didn’t save bushmasters, but
they’d save constrictors if they came upon a constrictor. Walsh tells
some stories about having constrictors crawl in the boats and squeeze
him. I don’t know how much truth there is in that or how much these were
nightmares that John XE "Walsh, John" had. But — what are they? — the
little pigs that they have in the jungle. I’m trying to remember all the
species that they —

Rowe: But we’re talking about large and small animals, reptiles,
mammals, amphibia.

Cummings: Sure, anything. There weren’t species selected. We didn’t
select a species. You saved whatever you could.

Rowe: Of course. And these were huge boats that they put them all in?

Cummings: Big canoes, dugouts, really, great big dugouts that they put
the animals in. They took them to a place where they could release them.
You’ve got to be careful releasing them. You don’t have the habitat
problem that you have, for instance, if you tried to transport a deer
that was in an urban area, you’re trying to take a deer up to the woods
in Maine XE "Maine" and putting it \[there\]. That’s a problem. The
habitat is so close to what they’re in that they can survive in it. But
you can’t put too many in the habitat because the habitat won’t support
them. You also can’t put them in a place where there a lot of local
hunters that are going to come in and slaughter them. So John XE "Walsh,
John" had to select his release sites very carefully. Bear in mind, this
took place over a period of time. You don’t do this in a week or two
weeks.

Rowe: I understand. How long a period of time was it?

Cummings: I think John XE "Walsh, John" was down there pretty much most
of a year.

Rowe: Now, the indigenous people that were helping you out there, was
this their territory as well that was being flooded?

Cummings: Sure. Oh, yes.

Rowe: And they were relocated as well, I presume, into other parts of
the forest.

Cummings: Yes. Again, I don’t think in that habitat — I don’t think it
was a big problem for them. You know, find another spot in the jungle to
go and live, or the rainforest.

Rowe: In your estimation, how much did this project cost?

Cummings: I have no idea, Martin. I have no idea. I knew at the time. I
could have told you at the time. I can’t remember. In dollars it wasn’t
terribly expensive. When you say we had the costs of transporting John
XE "Walsh, John" and sustaining him down there. To my memory, we didn’t
use a lot of materials. We used some tranquilizers, some drugs, some
animal medical supplies. I don’t think we paid the Indians much. And the
equipment that we used — we may have had a couple of boats with outboard
motors, but we didn’t have very expensive equipment.

We had more expensive and more sophisticated equipment when we did the
same thing in Panama XE "Panama" . But at that point we were able to get
most of it donated so that we had trucks that Ford XE "Ford Motor
Company" Motor Company gave us, engines that Mercury Engines XE "Mercury
Engines" gave us, and so forth.

Rowe: How did you approach these companies to get that kind of materiel
for your projects?

Cummings: Just ask them for it.

Rowe: And they were willing to give it because they felt it was a good
cause?

Cummings: Yes. The interesting thing — we went around and tried to get
support from a number of companies. The problem that you get with large
corporations with animal welfare is they’re always afraid that they’re
going to be accused of favoring animals over people.

For instance, we went to what was then United Brands XE "United Brands"
, the old United Fruit Company XE "United Fruit Company" \\t "See United
Brands" , and we said, “Hey, look, you guys do a lot of business down
there in Panama XE "Panama" , and we’d like to get your support for this
project.” They came back to us and, of course, these big companies, they
have to go through some sort of a committee. The committee was afraid
that if they gave us funds to save the animals in the jungle that was
being flooded that they’d be accused of giving us money to take care of
animals when they weren’t doing enough to educate kids and to make sure
the kids weren’t dying from malnutrition and so forth. So they felt it
could be a negative to them.

But what they did come back with, which was just as good as the money,
was they offered us free transport on their ships. So we were able to
get trucks that we were getting from Ford XE "Ford Motor Company" down
there on their boats. Many supplies and materials we didn’t incur any
shipping costs. It was a big help.

Rowe: Has that been the strategy that you and the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
have used when approaching large corporations who are concerned about
being perceived as helping animals over people, that you say, “Well,
supply us in a way where it’s invisible.”

Cummings: Yes. Well, not really, Martin. It was really just a strategy
that we used in connection with the — and WSPA XE "World Society for the
Protection of Animals (WSPA)" does use it in connection with these
rescue operations that we do. I think today — I’m trying to think of
some of our corporate donors. Certainly some of the foundations that are
maintained — big corporations tend to maintain charitable foundations
rather than give you the money directly. The foundations, if they have a
feeling for animal welfare, are not reluctant to give to them.

Rowe: Do you find more corporations have more of a feeling for animal
welfare? Have they been lifted up with everybody else’s consciousness?

Cummings: Yes, I would say so, Martin, but they’re still not a great
source of funding. Generally you will find that funds may be made
available by a big corporation if some individual, some key individual,
in the corporation has some feeling for animal welfare. I’m not going to
tell you who it is, but we have an individual whose dog was poisoned and
the dog was brought to Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" .
They saved the dog’s life. His corporation has become a very generous
benefactor for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . It’s a large national corporation. He now
makes — through his corporation he makes gifts to us.

We had another individual on the island of Nantucket XE
"Massachusetts:Nantucket" who was a very — he sold his company and he’s
very wealthy now. He gives us money because he lives right almost next
door to the hospital and he’s gotten to know the hospital. So you’ve got
these specific instances in which individuals in corporations will give
XE "funding/finance" \\r "funding1" . We’ve got — and you’ll see. I
don’t know if you’re familiar with Merrill Stamper XE "Stamper, Merrill"
and his program, the Humane Education Program XE "Humane Education
Program" , that we worked with and tried to get off the ground.

Rowe: Why don’t you tell me about that program XE "animal shelters" \\r
"shelter1" ? I should mention that the Nantucket XE
"Massachusetts:Nantucket" shelter was opened in 1950, just for the
record, the shelter that you mentioned that this gentleman —

Cummings: In Nantucket XE "Massachusetts:Nantucket" ? Yes. That was —
Nantucket was a just a very small downtown shelter, Martin. We had no
hospital there. In those days we had a hospital on Martha’s Vineyard XE
"Massachusetts:Martha’s Vineyard" , and the staff veterinarian used to
come over to Nantucket one or two days a week to take care of the
animals on Nantucket. We built — we really built a full-scale shelter
and hospital on Nantucket XE "Massachusetts:Nantucket" sometime in the
60s. The first veterinarian that we —

Rowe: \[In\] 1968 — ’66, 1966.

Cummings: Yes. The first veterinarian we put there was a fellow named
Gary Snelly XE "Snelly, Gary" who had retired as chief of staff at
Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" . We since have built a
brand new hospital down there. We just opened it a year ago.

Rowe: Through the help of this corporate donor who lives next door?

Cummings: Oh, we have very broad support on the island of Nantucket XE
"Massachusetts:Nantucket" . I don’t know how much you know about
Nantucket, but it’s an island resort that a lot of wealthy people, a lot
of people from New York XE "New York:New York City" , go to.

Rowe: How does generally the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" go about creating interest and
framing the argument for a new hospital or a new shelter or a new
veterinary place? You’ve seen many of these things go up over the last
years. How does it go about framing a proposal, et cetera, and
approaching donors and things like that?

Cummings: The first thing you have to — before you’re going to build a
shelter you’ve got to see what the need is for it. Generally, you don’t
have to be a genius to see what the need is. We had some shelters that
we weren’t terribly proud of that had been around for a long time that
had been expanded with whatever resources were available and were really
inadequate to take care of the number of animals that we wanted to take
care of. Also, we didn’t think \[we\] were able to be a presence in the
specific communities that we wanted to have. That’s how you start off.
Brockton XE "Massachusetts:Brockton" , I guess, is a pretty typical
example. We had a shelter that had been in existence in Brockton for I
don’t know how long. It was not a great shelter. It had a small house
that the shelter manager lived in and a couple of small buildings. What
we decided — the first thing we did was to —

Rowe: I should say that the Brockton XE "Massachusetts:Brockton" animal
shelter was opened in 1944.

Cummings: Yes. That’s the —

Rowe: The first one.

Cummings: — the first one. So we first looked to see whether it made
sense to —

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

Cummings: So you look for a site and then you design the shelter. The
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" generally commits to the building before the funding is all in
place. We don’t wait until we’ve got all the money to start building. In
the case of Brockton XE "Massachusetts:Brockton" , we decided to
involved the community down there much more in the shelter, which is
something that we’re doing now more and more with our different
operations throughout the state.

Rowe: Now, this was — the actual — the second shelter was dedicated in
1994, so this was in the early 1990s that you began working on this.

Cummings: Yes XE "funding/finance" \\r "funding2" . Well, we had a
strategic plan, I think, that we adopted probably around 1990 as to
where we wanted to go with regard to upgrading facilities all over the
state, and we followed it pretty well. But we built the Brockton XE
"Massachusetts:Brockton" shelter. We actually borrowed money in order to
put it up. We did the fund-raising pretty much after the shelter was
built. I don’t know if — you probably haven’t visited any of these
shelters, but this is a shelter that is designed not just to be an
animal shelter but it’s also an area where our law enforcement
department or the agent that’s down in that area can have an office. It
has humane education facilities. We can have places where kids can come
and had conference rooms. It has the usual shelter facilities, as well.
It’s a pretty nice location. It’s sort of out in the country. The other
one was right on the edge of a main highway. The highway was built after
the shelter was built, and that’s one of the reasons that we didn’t use
that site.

Rowe: Does it have spay/neuter facilities?

Cummings: No. I don’t know that we have spay/neuter. I’m trying to
remember whether we do the spay/neuters there or whether we do them
through Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" . I can’t answer
that question, Martin, whether we’re doing the spay/neuters down there
or we’re bringing them to Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . I’m not
sure of that. Most of the — a shelter like Brockton XE
"Massachusetts:Brockton" tends to have emergency medical facilities, but
we don’t have a staff veterinarian down there.

One thing we’ve done that — we now have a staff veterinarian whose job
it is to be the staff veterinarian to the shelters strictly with no
association to Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" except to use
Angell as a resource. The veterinarian’s principal task is to be
responsible for the health of the animals in the shelters and to make
sure there are procedures to take care of animals that are in distress
and to make sure that the shelter staffs are well-trained in first aid
and the hands-on stuff they can do for injured animals and so forth.
It’s a fairly recent innovation that we’ve done. Normally we provide
medical care to the animals through the hospital, but this is a staff
veterinarian whose sole responsibility is the health and welfare of the
animals in the shelter, which I think is an innovation. It’s a very good
idea. Although we were able to give good care, it isn’t the same to have
a staff veterinarian whose principal job is in Angell XE "Angell
Memorial Animal Hospital" . Rowley \[Memorial Animal Hospital XE "Rowley
Memorial Animal Hospital" \] out in Springfield XE
"Massachusetts:Springfield" is going out to these shelters XE "spaying
and neutering" \\r "spay1" .

Once you’ve identified the needs for the shelter — there’s an
interesting thing about fund-raising. When you go out and you fund-raise
for a facility, it isn’t just to get the money to put the facility up.
The fund-raising creates a sense of community involvement. I’m convinced
that when you build a new facility, even if you had the money in the
bank to build it, you’re much better off to go out into that community
and raise some money to build it because now you’ve involved the
community in your shelter. You’ve involved a lot of people who might
hardly use the facilities of the shelter, might hardly not even know
it’s there. These people become aware of the shelter. They become aware
of what the shelter does. They become aware of the problems that the
shelter has to face, why we have a shelter there. You’ve got an entire
community involved in the humane movement by the fund-raising. The money
is almost secondary to it.

We see this where you’ve got newsletters that go out into the community,
you’ve got community support for whatever you want to do, and you try to
involve the community as much as possible in your work. The benefits are
— the real benefit is just the fact that the community becomes aware of
what we’re trying to do.

Rowe: What different things did you do to go about raising that
community awareness and fund-raising at the same time?

Cummings: They do all — the usual thing you do is you form a committee
and get some local people on the committee. They put out written
appeals. They have maybe fund-raising activities — whatever, bake sales,
raffles, whatever people traditionally do to raise money. Then after the
fund-raising part of it is over, then you form a local advisory
committee that meets and keeps involved. And they usually put out a
newsletter. They do periodic fund-raising things for the shelter. For
instance, they may need blankets, so they put out an appeal for people
to bring old blankets to the shelter for animals. The cost of the
blankets is probably not an awful lot; we could afford to buy the
blankets. But it means a lot more to the people to be able to bring the
blankets.

They also help us in — we do this through the local media a lot. You
know, you’re publicizing the animals that you have for adoption and also
to get the word out on how to take care of your animals and what the
problems are, what are the dangers to your animals, why do we recommend
that in most instances a cat be kept indoors, and why is it important
that your dog not be allowed to run wild, and so forth and so on.

Rowe: Do you have a volunteer program in place?

Cummings: Oh, sure. That’s another thing. Volunteers come and work in
the shelter and walk the dogs and so on. Cats you don’t walk much. We
have volunteer programs in most of our facilities now XE "public
relations/outreach" \\r "pr1" .

What’s interesting about — fund-raising is kind of a dirty word, and
some organizations are better at fund-raising than anything else. I’ve
really come to believe that fund-raising is a very, very important — has
a very important humane education role. Just as an example, WSPA XE
"World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" is — particularly
in England XE "England" — has been fund-raising very aggressively with
excellent results, not just in terms of money but in terms of the number
of supporters we’ve enlisted. Every piece of mail that goes out
highlights an international animal welfare problem. My position is if,
even though maybe only six percent of the people that get that send
money back as a result, if fifty percent of the people read that stuff
or more, it’s having a great impact on the public and it’s well worth
the effort simply because of the humane education. I became convinced of
the value of this when I watched Brian XE "Davies, Brian" Davies’ early
work.

Rowe: Who is Brian XE "Davies, Brian" Davies?

Cummings: He’s the founder of IFAW.

Rowe: The International Fund for Animal Welfare XE "International Fund
for Animal Welfare (IFAW)" .

Cummings: Yes. People thought that he was a bit of a charlatan.

Rowe: He was very interested in — correct me if I’m wrong — in seals and
the protection of seals XE "seals" \\r "fur1" .

Cummings: Yes XE "fur" \\r "fur1" . Well, Brian XE "Davies, Brian" put
out this stuff XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "fur1" . If you’ve
ever seen one of his packets, he’d have an envelope within the packet
and it would say “do not open this if you’re easily offended by blood.”
You’d open it up and it’d be pictures of the seals being clubbed. He
went up on the ice and got himself arrested up in Canada XE "Canada" by
the Canadian authorities. I think he had people spraying dye on seal
coats and so forth.

The only thing Brian XE "Davies, Brian" was doing at that time, he had a
bank of early model IBM word processing machines down in Hyannis XE
"Massachusetts:Hyannis" , and he was pumping out literature by the ton
and taking in money by the ton. The only thing he ever used it for was
to go up, he himself, go up on the — I think he bought himself a
helicopter and he went up and so forth.

We, in those days — we being ISPA XE "International Society for the
Protection of Animals (ISPA)" — were taking a very responsible attitude.
We were trying to work with the Canadian government to cut down on the
number of seals that they’d allow to be slaughtered. We were looking to
see whether or not the method of killing the animals was humane, whether
there was a better way to do it. We were trying to discourage them from
— some of the Norwegian sealers were shooting them and we were trying to
stop that. But we weren’t going at it in a sensational way, the way
Brian XE "Davies, Brian" Davies was. The net result was — unfortunately,
it’s come back.

Rowe: What do you mean by sensational in that regard? You just mean the
very high publicity, bloody packages idea?

Cummings: Sure. Yes. And really gory stuff.

Rowe: And in some ways illegally, like civil disobedience, like getting
arrested, et cetera, et cetera.

Cummings: Yes. His getting arrested didn’t slow the sealing people down
at all. But because of Brian XE "Davies, Brian" — anyway, he went to
Europe and he was saturating Europe with all this stuff. But the net
result was, unfortunately sealing is coming back. But all of a sudden,
in Europe, which was the greatest market for sealskin — all of a sudden
the market dried up. People wouldn’t touch sealskin, and the hunt was
just about crippled as a result. It was purely because — it wasn’t
because of anything we’d done. It was because Brian XE "Davies, Brian"
Davies went out with all this sensational publicity. He didn’t raise a
ton of money. He raised a ton of money in the United States. But people
got that stuff and they were so turned off by it that he effectively
stopped the seal hunt for a while. Unhappily, what you find is as you
push down one corner of the featherbed and another corner pops up.

That was a great lesson to me, that the fund-raising activities that go
on have much, much more benefit than just bringing in the money. If you
could justify just blind mailings, I think from the standpoint of
achieving a purpose.

Rowe: Do you feel in that regard, in terms of the sensational behavior
of Brian XE "Davies, Brian" Davies and perhaps from now other animal
advocacy groups like People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals XE
"People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" , that the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
has been a little over-cautious in its attempts to work through the
system? Would you have preferred that the organization go out on a limb
or do you believe it has gone out on a limb and tried to push the
envelope, quite literally and metaphorically?

Cummings: Well, in the — MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" is very much a
middle-of-the-road organization. I think the philosophy that the MSPCA
XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" has always had is that we’re very result oriented. We want to
see results. We want to see immediate results.

In the best of all worlds there would be no animal exploitation, there’d
be no animal experimentation, and so forth and so on. But you have to
recognize that Utopia is probably not going to happen in our lifetimes.
In the meantime, while we’re waiting for Utopian views to prevail, there
are a lot of animals that have to be cared for. You can say that in the
best of all worlds there would be no problem with companion animals.
There would be no so-called surplus animals in the world. Okay, that’s
wonderful. We’d love to see that. We’d love to see a world in which you
didn’t have to have an animal shelter XE "animal shelters" . But today
you’ve got the problem and you’ve got to deal with it, so we maintain
the shelters.

With regard to animal experimentation XE "animal experimentation and
testing" \\r "exper2" , we’d love to live in a world where people didn’t
experiment on animals XE "medicine/medical community" \\r "exper2" . But
I don’t think anybody believes you’re going to do away with vivisection,
certainly not in the United States. What our job has done is to try to
make life better to the extent that we can for the animals that are used
in experiments and to limit the number of animals that are used in
experimentation as much as we can. Now, sure, we could take an extreme
position. But suddenly, when you take the extreme position sometimes you
lose your ability to have a present impact. I’ve often said that with
regard to vivisection, if there were not any — at least, it’s not quite
true today; it’s changed a lot. But back a few years ago, if there
hadn’t been antivivisection societies, the medical profession would have
had to go out and invent them because every time when we were trying to
get laws passed to regulate vivisection, what you heard about
immediately was that what we were trying to do was to eliminate medical
research, and do you know how many children are going to die if you
eliminate it? And bang, you’d hit a brick wall.

So what you have to do is convince thinking people that you’re not out
to eliminate it, but you’re just out to regulate it and to make life
better for the \[animals\]. You can’t get the medical profession to
admit that they are needlessly subjecting millions of animals to
suffering every year.

Rowe: They’re taking an absolutist position, but you can’t afford to
take an absolutist position because the animals are suffering.

Cummings: That’s right. So what we have to do is just keep chipping
away, and we’ve made some inroads into it. I think we’ve made
significant inroads into it. Sure, you could — what the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
gets criticized for all the time is people will say, “If we had all this
money we could solve this problem,” whatever the problem is that they
happen to be engaged in. Number one, you don’t solve problems by
throwing money at them. You could spend a billion dollars and you still
wouldn’t eliminate vivisection in this country, I guarantee it. And you
could spend a billion dollars and you would not eliminate the surplus
animal problem in this country either. You just have to keep educating
people and just keep working on it. I think we’ve made some valuable
strides on it.

But that’s the basic philosophy of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . You could take the
position that — years ago you could have taken the position that the
answer to the cruelties with regard to slaughter XE "slaughtering of
animals" and transportation XE "transporting animals" of animals is to
stop using animals for food. You’re not going to get anywhere that way.
That’s a position, incidentally, that if you go to India XE "India" , if
you talk about the humane treatment of cattle, the reaction you get is,
“Why do you bother trying to regulate that? Why don’t you just try to
convert the country to vegetarianism XE "vegetarianism" ?” Well, okay,
we don’t think we can do that. We don’t think we can take a carnivorous
population and turn them into vegetarians. So what we’re trying to do is
to make sure that the animals that are involved are treated as humanely
as possible and that the transportation is humane and that the slaughter
is humane.

Rowe: Let me just go back to vivisection over the last forty years. How
has the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" been trying to dialogue with the medical research
community? What approaches and strategies of maintaining some sort of
link with the medical research community to provide some incremental
change in how animals are kept, or has the community just been resistant
to any attempts to dialogue from the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ?

Cummings: Well, the person that could answer that better than I would be
Peter Therin XE "Therin, Peter" \[phonetic\]. My own personal opinion is
that you don’t really have a dialogue with the medical community. I’m on
the board of a hospital system. My son is a physician. My son-in-law is
a physician. My brother-in-law is a physician. So I’ve got a lot of ties
into the medical \[profession\]. My son, incidentally, although he’s a
physician, he’s very much caught up in the humane movement, as is my
son-in-law. My daughter is a veterinarian and she’s been involved in
humane work ever since she was a little kid. So I don’t have any
prejudices against them.

But particularly with the research people, you don’t have a dialogue
with them. The only way you work with them is that you enforce the laws
and that you hope that the people, the veterinarians that are working
now with lab animals on the Lab Animals Act, are people that will be
sympathetic to animals. That we work with. You don’t work with the
profession itself, Martin, because — well, the individual physician is
one kind of a guy. To the research physician the animal is — he has no
more emotion about that than he has about a piece of furniture. In fact,
an awful lot of these research guys — if you’ve been involved with them
— are about as emotionless about their patients as they are about a
piece of furniture. This is science and it’s a different world. If you
can’t get a person to feel a little emotion towards a child, it’s pretty
hard to get that person to feel a little emotion towards an animal.

Rowe: They’re being professionals though.

Cummings: Yes.

Rowe: The MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" joined up with Sandi Larson XE "Larson, Sandy" and
the New England Antivivisection Society XE "New England Antivivisection
Society (NEAVS)" to work together to pass the 1981 bill opposing some
use of animals, companion animals, in the labs. Why did the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
feel it was important to join that campaign, and how did they feel that
this campaign might be more successful than previous attempts to try to
break into the vivisection industry?

Cummings: I think at that time it was just trying to put a coalition
together of as many people as possible. We never have been — you have to
understand, Martin, that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" has never been an opponent of
the New England XE "New England Antivivisection Society (NEAVS)" or any
antivivisection society. We don’t see ourselves as opposing them in any
way. If any of my remarks — don’t construe my remarks as saying that I’m
against them. I think they’re very well-intentioned people. I have no
quarrel with their goals and their aims.

It’s just that I feel that well-intentioned though they might be,
they’ve been the excuse that the medical profession used to use — it’s a
lot harder to do it — as to why you shouldn’t regulate medical research
on animals. They try to — anything that happens they say, “Well, this is
what these people are trying to do.” It dilutes our — it did. Again, I’m
not so sure it does now. It did dilute our effectiveness a little bit.

For years and years and years I worked pretty closely with a fellow
named George XE "Farnum, George" Farnum who was head of the New England
\[Antivivisection Society XE "New England Antivivisection Society
(NEAVS)" \]. George was a nice guy. He was a lawyer, but he was
full-time with antivivisection. Whenever we’d be involved in an estate
together — many, many estates would name the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , the Animal
Rescue League XE "Animal Rescue League" , and the New England
Antivivisection Society. George would call me up and he’d say, “Have you
seen the account of such-and-such an estate?” I’d say, “Yes, George XE
"Farnum, George" .” He’d say, “It looks to me as though all his expenses
are too high, particularly the legal expenses.” He’d say, “Why don’t you
go to probate court and see if you can’t get them cut down?”

I can tell you from experiences — I learned that very, very early on —
to go to the probate court, at least here in Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" , and tried to get a lawyer’s fees cut down on a
probate estate where the money is going to animal welfare, you’re
wasting your time XE "funding/finance" \\r "funding3" .

Rowe: Because lawyers don’t like to have their fees cut or because of
animal welfare?

Cummings: Yes. Well, you may not know this, Martin, but the judges are
lawyers. \[Laughter\]. They used to practice.

Rowe: I understand. I understand.

Cummings: And I learned that — boy, I learned that the hard way. I went
after a lawyer that I thought had way overcharged an estate. His
expenses were — there were two of them. It was a lawyer and it was an
executor, and the executor was from New York XE "New York:New York City"
. The executor was a graduate of Harvard XE "Harvard University" . And I
noticed that the executor came up to confer with the lawyer usually on a
Saturday, and the Saturdays always coincided with a Harvard home
football game. I mean, the fees were pretty high. I remember the judge
hardly commented after my argument was over and he just sort of scowled,
and the next thing I knew they allowed the account in full.

But, anyway, George XE "Farnum, George" was always trying to get me to
throw the snowballs that George XE "Farnum, George" wanted to make. I
was kind of always amused by it. He didn’t want to go into court and do
it. He was a decent guy. We worked together a lot. There was no
organizational antagonism.

Rowe: What were the — was there a type of person generally who gave
money in their bequests to the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , or did they come from all
sorts of people from different walks of life?

Cummings: Well, the people in fund-raising have spent years trying to
figure that one out, Martin. The kind of people that give you the big
money are a mystery to you.

Rowe: Because they’re anonymous?

Cummings: No, no. I mean they just — people who have seemingly no
connection to your organization. Some of them perhaps have been members
and had your magazine for a couple of years. But people without a strong
connection will leave you a million dollars in their wills. The example
that everybody around here cites is a fellow named Marks XE "Marks,
\_\_\_\_\_\_" who — I don’t know how, I’ve forgotten how he made his
money. But he lived at the Harvard Club XE "Harvard Club" and left
millions and millions of dollars to the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , the New England
Antivivisection Society XE "New England Antivivisection Society (NEAVS)"
, and the Animal Rescue League XE "Animal Rescue League" and one other
charity. I think everybody got about four million dollars out of it. I
don’t believe any of us could find any connection between our
organizations and this fellow Marks. People at the Harvard Club were
sort of upset. They thought after living there all those years he might
have given some money to the club. I’m sure he looked at the Harvard
Club, I think, probably as a hotel and this was just where he lived. The
other thing was, with all that money why would he want to live in the
Harvard Club? It’s comfortable, but he could have had a much higher
standard of living.

Now, as far as your donor, your nickel-and-dime — I shouldn’t say
nickel-and-dime; that’s not right — but your relatively small donor. I
would say that typically the female donor is more prevalent than the
male. But there’s a temptation to say that there’s an age group, and I
don’t think that’s true. These aren’t all little old ladies with tennis
shoes and big diamond rings anymore.

Rowe: Did it used to be?

Cummings: Yes. I think to a great extent probably your principal donors
would be somewhat elderly maybe and female. I don’t think that’s true
anymore.

Rowe: For the same reasons that the animal advocacy movement has
broadened and grown through the 60s and the 70s larger
consciousness-raising?

Cummings: Yes.

Rowe: Do they tend to be from a particular class or across all
socio-economic backgrounds?

Cummings: Pretty much all economic backgrounds and classes. I wouldn’t
identify any particular ethnic group as not strong in supporting. I
think maybe years and years ago the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" tended to be supported by
the Boston Brahmin.

Rowe: When did that begin to change, do you think? Again in the 60s?

Cummings: Probably in the 60s, yes. Just the makeup of the board of
directors of the organizations, humane organizations, you saw that it
was pretty much the old boys club that was on the board.

Rowe: When you joined?

Cummings: Yes. Oh, sure. We had investment bankers, a lot of people in
the investment business, real estate people, and so forth and so on.
It’s a lot of old Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" money types.

Rowe: Was there a conscious effort to change that, or was it just sort
of an evolving change of interest?

Cummings: No, I think it’s sort of an evolving thing. The only conscious
effort that we’ve made — of course, you’re always trying to bring young
people along, but that’s always true. The only thing I would say was a
conscious effort has been an effort to — well, two things I should say.
One is to bring people from other parts of the state onto the board.
There’s too much local in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . The other
is, although this is long past and you don’t even think about it anymore
— the other was an effort to make sure we brought some females onto the
board. Now it’s just sort of automatic. We’re not out to recruit anybody
specifically XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r
"ar2" .

Very early on we recruited a minority guy, an Afro-American XE
"African-Americans" . Tragic thing. He was a super guy. He was a clerk
of courts over here in the federal district court, marvelous guy. And he
died. God, he was in his late forties or early fifties. He died of a
heart attack. It was tragic. We didn’t — actually I don’t know that we
even thought of looking for at that point an Afro-American. He was just
a good guy and he had an interest in animals, and we brought him on the
board. But right now I think we’ve got a pretty diversified board from
the standpoint of background and geographic background — an excellent
board really.

Rowe: Do you feel that the board has worked in promoting those kinds of
— the issues that you feel are important? Presumably the board was meant
to bring in other parts of Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" rather than
the sort of eastern Boston, greater Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston"
\[area\].

Cummings: Yes. It’s been — we’re really, I think, doing a wonderful job
now of including the western part of Massachusetts.

Rowe: How have you been doing that?

Cummings: Well, we built a brand new operation out there and we put
together a wonderful community organization to do it. We’ve got a
Springfield XE "Massachusetts:Springfield" advisory committee — very,
very active. We’ve got Springfield board members. The Springfield,
western Massachusetts community is very involved. I don’t know how much
you know about Massachusetts, but to people in Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" there isn’t an awful lot beyond Route 128. The
people who live out in Springfield are very conscious of that. They feel
they’re closer to Connecticut XE "Connecticut" than they are to \[Boston
XE "Massachusetts:Boston" \]. They resent Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" . So you have to make an effort to include them.
We make sure we have at least one directors meeting a year out in
Springfield XE "Massachusetts:Springfield" . I get out there as much as
I can to events that they have and whatnot. But it’s a challenge. I
think we’ve —

Rowe: What about the Berkshires and further west?

Cummings: The Berkshires — we had a shelter in the Berkshires.
Pittsfield XE "Massachusetts:Pittsfield" is much more part of Albany XE
"New York:Albany" and upstate New York than it is Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" . We had a shelter there. For a variety of reasons, we
turned it over to a local organization. It’s being run out of
Pittsfield. We do law enforcement work in Pittsfield XE
"Massachusetts:Pittsfield" , but we no longer have a shelter out in the
Berkshires XE "managing an organization" \\r "manage1" .

Rowe: Is it true, in your estimation, that when it comes to the SPCAs
around the country and even around the world, the idea of borders isn’t
particularly important, it’s localities, even if those localities go
over states. The MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" hasn’t seen itself as the commonwealth’s
protection of cruelty to animals except in a legal sense. But in terms
of caring for animals, it will take animals from outside of the state.

Cummings: Oh, sure XE "veterinary medicine" . Well, caring for animals,
of course. The hospital in Springfield XE "Massachusetts:Springfield" is
almost as — well, it’s as good as Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal
Hospital" . It doesn’t have all the resources that Angell has,
particularly with regard to radiology, for instance. But with
communications the way they are, you can avail yourselves of the
advantage. Anyway, the animals that are cared for in those hospitals —
the animals in Springfield XE "Massachusetts:Springfield" in the Rowley
Memorial Hospital XE "Rowley Memorial Animal Hospital" come from Vermont
XE "Vermont" , New Hampshire XE "New Hampshire" , Connecticut XE
"Connecticut" , New York XE "New York" . The animals that are brought to
Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" are brought down from New
Hampshire, they’re brought up from Rhode Island XE "Rhode Island" , from
all over the state. We do have the occasional animal that’s flown in
from God knows where. We’ve had them come from as far as California XE
"California" for specialized treatment. So the medical care of animals
is definitely without borders.

As far as the shelter operations, the shelter operations tend to be more
local. In the eastern part of Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" we have
shelters on the islands, we’ve got one on the cape, we’ve got the
Brockton XE "Massachusetts:Brockton" shelter, the Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" shelter, we’ve got one in Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" . That pretty much covers the eastern part of
the state. But you don’t see people bringing animals great distances to
shelters, nor do you see people coming from great distances to adopt
animals from shelters. They tend to go to local shelters XE "animal
shelters" \\r "shelter2" .

The law enforcement work that we do, of course, is statewide. That’s
done all over the state.

Rowe: If an animal whose owner lives in Connecticut XE "Connecticut" and
the animal is found abused in Massachusetts somehow and is taken to a
shelter in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , whose jurisdiction is it
to prosecute that person?

Cummings: That, unfortunately — the example that you posed — that would
be in the jurisdiction of Connecticut XE "Connecticut" . If you killed
somebody in New Hampshire XE "New Hampshire" and brought the body to
Massachusetts, the murder or homicide —

Rowe: So it’s the same with humans and animals.

Cummings: Yes. There’s one other thing. When I talk about the borders,
the work that we do in large animals out in Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" , however, that’s pretty borderless. Those
ambulances go all over the place. In fact, some of the work that they do
— well, they might go to an equestrian — they might be asked to attend
an equestrian meeting in Virginia XE "Virginia" or someplace they’d go
to. So they’re all over the country really out of Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" . That’s the only large animal facility that we
have now.

Rowe: Large animals include farm animals as well?

Cummings: Yes.

Rowe: How do the farm animals come to the facility? Are they downed
animals? These are farmers bringing in sick cattle?

Cummings: Well, they wouldn’t bring in sick cattle. The animals that we
get — you get — well, some of them are abandoned. It doesn’t fit the
wild animal, not the large animal. We get geese and ducks and poultry
that are abandoned. People get chicks for Easter or something — another
terrible thing.

A lot of them are horses XE "law and legislation" \\r "horse1" , horses
that have been abused XE "horses" \\r "horse1" . What our agents will
sometimes do — and this makes a lot of sense — is they’ll find somebody
abusing a horse. They’ll go to that person and say, “I’ll give you a
choice. You either turn the horse — sign the horse over to us and agree
not to have any more horses or you’re going to be prosecuted.” That
takes care of the horse abuse, and then the horse ends up at Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" and we usually adopt them out.

Rowe: Have you found that to be a good strategy?

Cummings: Oh, it’s excellent, sure. Oh, yes.

Rowe: Why do you think it works well? Because the guy is let off the
hook?

Cummings: No, no, no. Because the guy doesn’t have any horses to abuse
anymore. You could prosecute him and the judge might or might not force
him to forfeit the horse. He may go to jail. He may pay a fine. He comes
out and he’s apt to be cruel to the horse again and abuse the horse. If
he doesn’t have any horses to abuse and he’s not going to have any
horses to abuse, we’ve protected the horses. We don’t care what happens
to the individual.

Rowe: There’s no further incentive to that guy to stop abusing horses
generally. He just won’t abuse that particular horse because he still
doesn’t own that.

Cummings: He isn’t going to own a horse. And in the horse business —

Rowe: So you’re saying to him, “You give us your horse, release the
rights to own that horse and all future horses, and we won’t prosecute
you.”

Cummings: Yes.

Rowe: How is that enforceable under the law?

Cummings: How is that what?

Rowe: He signs a document, a legal binding document?

Cummings: Yes. It’s hard for a person like that who’s had trouble with
us to get a job. The horse community in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts"
is a pretty tight community — or in New England. They know pretty much
what goes on. If he pops up someplace else and one of our agents says,
“This guy is bad news,” he’s probably out of a job. That works well. You
couldn’t do this with a guy that owned a dog and it’s hard to police.

Rowe: Why not? It’s hard to police.

Cummings: It’s hard. You can’t tell whether he’s got a dog. You can tell
whether a guy’s got a horse. You don’t stick a horse in the basement.
\[Laughter\]. So that’s a significant — sometimes people surrender
horses to us for one reason or another, and we find homes for them.

We used to use the farm as a place — up in Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" — as a place where people — where the police
would bring retired police horses. I’m not sure what they’re doing with
the retired horses now, police horses. I don’t think we have any. No,
I’m sure we don’t have any more retired police horses up there. Well,
you’ve got donkeys, cattle occasionally. Not too frequently do you get
cattle. People in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" don’t abuse cattle
particularly. They’re usually kept for —

Rowe: Not visibly anyway.

Cummings: No. I don’t — I think most of the people, for instance, that
have cows XE "cows" have milk cows. You don’t have beef cattle in
Massachusetts. I don’t know if you’ve had much experience with farmers
that have milk cows, but they generally treat them pretty well. They
know their names and they’re good to them. They feed them well and they
take good care of them. It’s a very, very hard demanding business to be
a farmer on a dairy farm, and most of the dairy farms in New England are
going under now. There are very few of them left. But we don’t see too
many cow abuse problems.

Rowe: Back to the horses, has the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" been involved with dealing
with the horse meat trade? Has it had much dealings where horses that
are being sold in auctions sometimes end up with, or has that not been
something that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" does?

Cummings: The only way we’d get involved with that, Martin, is through
regulation of the racetracks XE "racing" . I know we’ve — it’s hard for
me sometimes to remember where the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ’s work and WSPA XE "World
Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" ’s work has left off. The
most recent thing I can remember dealing with animals in the meat trade
is the transportation of horses. I think it was mostly out of Virginia
XE "Virginia" to France XE "France" . A lot of horses are exported from
the United States to France for the meat trade. I know we did an
investigation and came to some conclusions — this was some time ago —
and put pressure on both governments to make sure that the animals were
being transported humanely. Of course, the thing that WSPA XE "World
Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" is — this is one that we
have yet to, I think, make any significant inroads on, and that is that
WSPA XE "World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" ’s position
is that the international transportation or any transportation of
animals for meat should be the carcass trade, that animals should be
slaughtered close to where they’ve lived and there’s no reason why you
don’t —

Rowe: Live exports, in other words XE "transporting animals" \\r
"transport1" .

Cummings: Live exports XE "slaughtering of animals" \\r "transport1" .
It’s particularly — one of the worst examples, of course, is the New
Zealand XE "New Zealand" /Australia XE "Australia" n sheep trade to the
Mideast. We haven’t been able to make a dent in that.

Rowe: Why not, do you think? Because of different cultural values about
animals?

Cummings: Because in the Mideast they demand having live animals XE
"religion:Islam" \\r "relig1" . I shouldn’t say we haven’t made some
strides XE "religion:Judaism" \\r "relig1" . I think we’ve made some
significant strides in both New Zealand XE "New Zealand" and Australia
XE "Australia" in getting them to raise the standards on the ships.
You’ve heard about some of the disasters, I’m sure, that have happened
on those ships. We’ve had some success there. But as far as getting the
Mideast to accept a carcass trade, they just absolutely won’t do it.
They will not do it. The animals are not slaughtered humanely when they
arrive. They’re not — it’s not as bad as some. They don’t pre-stun.

Rowe: It’s a hallel slaughter. It’s done with the blood dripping
upside-down like kosher slaughter.

Cummings: Yes. The sheep — I don’t know. I’m not sure that they invert
the sheep that way. It’s interesting. We made some strides with the
Muslim tradition in Egypt XE "Egypt" . We’ve had some —

Rowe: We now being WSPA.

Cummings: That’s WSPA XE "World Society for the Protection of Animals
(WSPA)" . I’m shifting into WSPA.

Rowe: That’s okay since they’ve been intimately involved in projects.

Cummings: We’ve made some very significant strides. We’ve got them to
accept pre-stunning in some of the — because they don’t have — the
Muslim religion is not organized with a pope and a bunch of cardinals
and few bishops under them. But we’ve had some very significant Muslim
leaders who endorse the humane slaughter for large cattle. These are
very hard things because you can’t get by this wall when you say,
“You’re being inhumane to animals.” You can’t get by the wall of “you’re
attacking our culture. You’re anti-Muslim.” We made some strides in
America years ago with kosher slaughter, and you had to get over this
“oh, this is anti — this is an attack on — you’re being anti-Semitic. It
has nothing to do with the animals; it’s against us.”

Rowe: The most obvious thing would be to employ Muslim or Jewish leaders
for this particular project. Was that what you did?

Cummings: Yes, but it’s hard to get them. You go to Brooklyn XE "New
York:Brooklyn" and try to get a couple of Hasids involved in the humane
movement, you’re not going to get them involved. And if they’re
involved, the rest of the Hasids aren’t going to listen to them. This
is, in the Muslim community — plus both Muslim — both the Muslim
religion and the Jewish religion, they have culture so intertwined with
religion that it’s very hard to — I mean, custom and tradition so
intertwined with the real religion \[that\] it’s hard to separate them.
This happens, I guess, in all religions, but we were talking about the —

Rowe: It happens in the religion of vivisection and science which is so
self-enclosed and self-contained and belief that any approach is an
attack on its —

Cummings: Sure. This is quite true. But ideally you’d have a carcass
trade. You wouldn’t have a problem. You could introduce humane
slaughter. Australia XE "Australia" would be very receptive to humane
slaughter, as is England XE "England" , and so would New Zealand XE "New
Zealand" . This country is pretty receptive to humane slaughter.

Rowe: Well, the Anglophone countries which have that tradition.

Cummings: Yes. But millions of cattle are slaughtered all over the world
in an inhumane fashion. You go through Africa and they’ve got little
slaughterhouses in every village. You know that they just cut the
throats and let them die.

Rowe: Some would say the same about the vast slaughterhouses and
feedlots in the United States.

Cummings: Yes.

Rowe: I’m going to stop the tape now and we can continue next time.

Cummings: Okay.

\[End of Session\].

Robert Cummings

Session \#2

April 28, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts

Martin Rowe, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Rowe: I’d like to pick up on something that I noted that the WSPA XE
"World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" got involved with
and am led to wonder how much you were involved with this or what your
ideas were about it and what your feelings were about it XE "law and
legislation" \\r "law2" . This was the campaign on childhood cruelty
toward animals among criminals and non-criminals alike. It’s an
interesting and emerging idea that seemed to be gathering steam
throughout the 60s and beyond that. Could you tell me a bit about the
campaign from your perspective and what the international role — using
the WSPA XE "World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" rather
than the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" — was?

Cummings: It’s hard to separate them, Martin, because the first study
was done — I’ve forgotten when it was done. I can’t remember whether the
study was sponsored by — I think it was sponsored by the MSPCA. It was
done by someone at Yale XE "Yale University" \[University\] using MSPCA
statistics. Then a further study was done by the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" going back
several years with our law enforcement department. That study involved a
review of people who had been prosecuted for animal cruelty and then
tracing the records through the state probation department to see how
many of them have been involved in crime, and particularly crimes of
violence, after being convicted or charged in any event with animal
cruelty abuses.

Rowe: So the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" statistics were involved with the animal
abuse issue, and then those statistics were used to trace back to
criminals.

Cummings: Yes. I’m trying to remember. I don’t know that WSPA XE "World
Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" did any independent study
except for — I’m trying to remember what their involvement was with the
earlier Yale XE "Yale University" study. The man’s name escapes me who
did that. That must have been done in the 70s, and the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
study was done in the 90s. I think WSPA has used the study, but I don’t
think WSPA XE "World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)"
commissioned the study or did anything except to publicize that. That’s
been pretty much of an MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" project.

Rowe: I had talked to Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" Kilroy about whether he
had seen in his law enforcement capacities this particular link as far
back as the 60s when he was working. He said, “Well, we kind of noticed
it but there wasn’t any systematic attempt to link the two and there
wasn’t really a consciousness of that case.” Yet the studies seem to
have been growing. How do you think that consciousness came about within
the organization? Do you have an idea about that?

Cummings: I think one of the things that contributed to the study and to
formalizing it is there was always that feeling that people who were
guilty of animal cruelty were also guilty of crimes against humanity.
The thing that sort of started it off was the famous Boston Strangler
case, Albert DeSalvo XE "DeSalvo, Albert" . It was quite well-publicized
that DeSalvo had a history of cruelty to animals. This I think planted
the seed of an idea. I think the fellow’s name was Travers who did the
study at Yale XE "Yale University" . I don’t remember. I think he was a
sociologist, but I’m not sure. That got us started on that.

Rowe: The DeSalvo XE "DeSalvo, Albert" case was when?

Cummings: Sometime in the late 60s, early 70s. He was later murdered in
jail. It was quite a thing. The Boston Strangler case was a big case
around here. It was one of those serial crime things that got
everybody’s attention. Of course, the reason the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" got involved
in it, the motivation was to try to promote two things. One is better
statutory remedies for animal cruelty, and secondly also to alert the
judiciary to the fact that you can’t take animal cruelty too lightly,
which is a problem that you always have XE "violence towards animals and
humans" \\r "violence1" .

Rowe: How did the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" think that the statutory situation would be
changed?

Cummings: The thing that we have been looking for, now more than ever,
is increasing the penalties for animal cruelty, making it more difficult
for a judge to continue a case without a finding and in effect let a
defendant get off with a slap on the wrist. What we’d like to do is to
make animal cruelty a felony rather than a misdemeanor so it would be
taken more seriously. That’s something we’ve been trying to do for a
long time.

Rowe: What would be typically the difference in punishment between a
misdemeanor and a felony?

Cummings: Misdemeanor is usually punishable by imprisonment not in
excess of two, two and a half years. Generally I think the statutes now
provide for incarceration for a year. A felony could provide for
incarceration in a state penitentiary rather than a house of correction,
and it would be for more than five years. I think it would be very
difficult to get a five-year conviction, but it would be taken a lot
more seriously than \[a misdemeanor\].

What typically is happening, particularly because our jails are so full
of people on drug charges, is that the judges say, “We’ll continue the
case for a year and if you don’t have any offenses within a year we’ll
expunge the record.” So the defendant basically gets off with a slap on
the wrist, sometimes also with a fine.

Rowe: In his assessment, Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" Kilroy believes that
while he would agree with you that the situation would be better if
there was just a higher threshold whereby people could be punished to
the maximum, even if they were not punished to the maximum, there would
be a greater disincentive to commit crimes if criminals knew that there
was a higher level at which they could be imprisoned. He feels that the
judiciary system is taking animal cruelty situations less seriously than
it did in the past. He feels that the situation has got worse in that
regard. Is that your experience?

Cummings: I think it’s true. It’s mostly because the courts are so
flooded with these drug cases that they have to send away, and they know
that the prisons are jammed. There isn’t any room in the prisons.
There’s a waiting list to get into some of these houses of correction.
You may be sentenced to six months in jail and you’ve got to wait three
months before you can go do your time. I think that’s one of the driving
reasons for it. I don’t think the judges necessarily rate animal cruelty
as less of an offense than they did in the past. I think they’re just
rating it as less of an offense that you send somebody to jail for.

I talked to a friend of mine a couple of years ago who was being
elevated from a district court to a superior court system. He’s a very
harsh individual. I said to him —

Rowe: A disciplinarian.

Cummings: Yes. I said, “When you end up on a superior court, you could
be a little bit harder on these defendants.” We were close enough
friends so I could talk frankly with him. He said, “You don’t understand
what kind of people come in front of people today, Bob. You have to work
to get in jail.” He said, “If you could see the records of the people
that we send to jail, they should have been locked up years ago.” I
think this is what the judges are up against. And they’ve got compulsory
sentencing for the drug abuse, so they can’t — somebody who is
technically selling drugs, they can’t slap him on the wrist. They’ve got
to put him in the slammer. They hate compulsory sentencing, the judges
do. I don’t care whether you’re on the federal bench or the state bench,
they detest a statute that says, “You’ve got to send a person to jail.
You don’t have any discretion.”

Rowe: So there’s a judicial disincentive to raise animal cruelty from a
misdemeanor to a felony.

Cummings: Yes.

Rowe: It will just increase the number of mandatory sentences.

Cummings: Yes. On the other hand, if it were raised, the judiciary would
go along with it. I mean, they’re not going to ignore the fact that this
person standing in front of them has been convicted of a felony. You
don’t hear of many felony convictions ending up in a continuance without
a finding. The best you’ll get on a felony conviction is maybe
probation. You might not do time, but you’re going to be within the
system. The situation there is if you’re on probation for animal cruelty
for, say, four years, and you’re guilty of another charge, you’re going
to go to jail. They just revoke the probation — no trial, no nothing,
bang, right into \[jail\]. It’s a much more severe method of dealing
with an individual who commits a crime.

Rowe: The second component of the strategy, which is to try and persuade
the judicial system of the fact that cruelty to animals can then lead on
to further or be a marker of or be simultaneous with cruelty towards
human beings — how is the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" approaching that
strategically? What is it trying to do to make judges aware of this
link?

Cummings: I think it’s something that the law enforcement officers point
out to the district attorneys offices so that the district attorney in
making an argument for sentencing can use it XE "education" \\r "educ1"
. I think that’s basically how it gets used as far as working with the
judiciary. Of course, the other aspect of it is it’s just the whole
fabric of humane education, too, and to get people more aware of it, to
get people aware that there are laws against this and that it’s more
serious that you might think, that this person who has been cruel to a
dog or a cat could end up being cruel to somebody else further down the
line, maybe guilty of assault or worse. It isn’t all just part of law
enforcement. It’s part of the overall humane education mission of the
society.

Rowe: Do you think the law is responding to that — both law and law
enforcement, the police being able to spot animal abuse in the domestic
violence cases and also in bringing out in front of the courts. In your
experience is it growing that awareness?

Cummings: I don’t know, Martin. I really don’t know whether this has
created an awareness in the general population or not. When you’re part
of it, you’re aware of a lot of things that people aren’t aware of. It
surprises me how unaware some people are. My wife watched a program the
other night, one of these “20/20 XE "20/20" ” programs on puppy mills XE
"dogs" . I got home about eleven o’clock and she was going on and on and
on about puppy mills. I said, “You’re not telling me anything I don’t
know.” She said, “What is the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" doing against it?” I said,
“Well, if a lot of people watched that show, that show has probably had
more impact on what we’re trying to do to puppy mills than all the work
we’ve been doing for years and years and years.” You can tell people
about the evils of the puppy mills and so forth, you can talk about how
the AKC is not an organization that people in the humane movement
generally are in —

Rowe: AKC — American Kennel Club XE "American Kennel Club (AKC)" .

Cummings: Yes. And why they publicized all this. But I use that as an
example of how a person who is very close to the humane movement, such
as my wife, and all the literature we have around and she’s been to a
lot of MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" meetings — she wasn’t aware of the magnitude of the
problem even being married to me. So I don’t know what the general
population out there is thinking. People talk to me because they know
I’m part of it and I’m aware of it and so forth.

Rowe: I’m more particularly thinking of the judicial criminal justice
system.

Cummings: We haven’t right now, certainly in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" — you talk to Walter and Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" will
tell you that hasn’t had — would they be less hard on defendants if we
hadn’t publicized this? Who knows?

Rowe: I know that there’s a case XE "violence towards animals and
humans" \\r "violence2" , I think in Florida XE "Florida" , that certain
law enforcement agencies are working with animal protection agencies and
officers to provide and share information for mutual understanding about
possible violence cases taking place in the home when the dog or the
domestic animal is a marker of violence for the child and vice versa,
when there’s a possibility that the animal is being abused because the
child is being abused or the wife is being abused. I know that some
jurisdictions are using that information together. I will certainly ask
Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" that.

Cummings: Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" would — my impression, and it’s
just a very general impression, and Walter would be able to answer this
— as to whether or not the police have become more sensitive to animal
cruelty because of this. My impression is that over the years the police
have generally become more sensitive to animal cruelty. The police in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , the state police and local police,
have always worked very well with our law enforcement people because
they know they’re all trained at the state police law enforcement
academy. They look on them as equals in law enforcement. I think you
will find varying degrees of cooperation, but I think by and large you
will find that our law enforcement department in Massachusetts gets a
great deal of respect from the local police. This is going to vary from
state to state all over the country.

Rowe: Right. It’s just a question of whether that information then feeds
through into the trial situation and then feeds through to the judge
that this is admissible evidence, as it were, within the general frame
of discussion about a person’s criminality.

Cummings: It’s not evidence, Martin.

Rowe: In a broad sense.

Cummings: It’s an argument that you make at the sentencing phase. This
is when a person is convicted, the prosecutor then makes an argument as
to what the penalty should be. They usually raise the gravity of the
crime and the person’s criminal record and so forth and so on. They can
certainly raise that in an oral argument before a judge as to why the
judge should take this seriously.

Rowe: Let’s move on to your chairmanship of the board in 1994. Was this
a one-year post?

Cummings: No.

Rowe: So you remained there for a year?

Cummings: Yes. I get elected every year, but I’m still chairman.

Rowe: Oh, I see. I wasn’t entirely clear about that. What did you hope
to accomplish as chairman of the board? What was your main aim as a
chairman with the organization as a whole?

Cummings: Strictly in the role of chairman as opposed to some of the
other roles that I play in the society XE "managing an organization" \\r
"manage2" , I think one of the objects that I had — and this is also in
my role as chairman of the nominating committee — is to strengthen the
board by getting geographic and gender and if possible ethnic
diversification on the board, bringing some young people along so that
we’ll have a continued source of capable dedicated people to serve on
the board. Our board members tend to stay on a long time. We don’t have
any principle of rotation as far as the board goes.

Rowe: Do you feel it was important to bring in people from different
areas of the community? And if so, could you —

Cummings: Well, basically the society is serving the entire
commonwealth, getting people from different geographic areas.

Rowe: Right. But not necessarily different jobs or specific areas of
expertise that could be brought in.

Cummings: Oh, sure. That’s implicit. You always look for somebody that
brings something to the board from which the board can benefit. The
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" board is a somewhat unique board as far as humane organizations
go. It’s a board that has always believed that the principal job of the
board is to make sure you’ve got good executives, particularly chief
executive, working for the society. You let them run the society and you
don’t get involved in micromanagement. Humane organizations very often
have boards that are involved right down to the cleaning of the cages.
This is not the role that our board has.

Our board takes its duties very seriously as far as looking at the
results of the organization, the financial strength of the organization,
its duty to approve long-range plans, capital expenditures, and the
financing plans behind some of our plans. We have subcommittees, of
course, our committees of the board, of course, the most important one
of which is the executive committee. But the board hears reports on
humane issues, but it doesn’t try to tell somebody like Carter Luke XE
"Luke, Carter" how to do his job. Of course, obviously there are going
to be issues that will be brought up. “What are we doing about this?
What are we doing about that?” But no one on the board would think of
having somebody like Carter Luke and tell Luke XE "Luke, Carter" that we
think you should be doing this, we think you should be doing that. I
went down to the Hyannis XE "Massachusetts:Hyannis" shelter the other
day and I didn’t feel that the place was clean enough or they should
paint the wall — that’s not a board function.

So when you talk about your goal as the chairman, your goal as chairman
is to get people on the board who can fulfill that function. We tend to
have a lot of people — mostly people on the board — who are successful
in some business endeavor. They want to see the society run in a very
businesslike way. It served the society well over the years. It’s
enabled the organization to grow. It’s given people who work for the
society a lot of leeway to do their jobs. It breeds a type of
professional within the organization.

Rowe: It’s given them leeway because it’s been financially solvent.

Cummings: Well, no, just because the board members aren’t climbing all
over them. This goes back from the days of the formation of the society.
This has been the policy to get just absolute top people in, and if you
don’t have top people, if you have somebody in a top job, you fire him.
That’s another unpleasant part of the board, but that’s as important as
hiring the right person. When you make a mistake, you get rid of them.

Rowe: Have you had to do that?

Cummings: I won’t comment on that, Martin. That’s not for publication.
But that has — on occasion people have been —

Rowe: I’m not asking specifics, but you’ve had to fire people.

Cummings: Oh, sure.

Rowe: Let’s step back from your position as chairman here. You’ve been
involved with the organization for now over forty years — forty-five
years almost. I’d like you to reflect on the question, do you feel that
there have been any things that the organization should have done?
Missed opportunities? Things that they could have done better? Areas
that they could have moved into that they didn’t?

Cummings: Yes. That’s a hard question to answer, Martin. If you look at
areas that we could have moved in that we didn’t —

Rowe: Let me just say, given the fact that you were very clear in your
first interview that the role of the humane society, the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
, is to provide the kinds of services that are necessary, that we don’t
live in a utopian world, and that as an advocacy organization it’s to a
certain extent delimited by the fact that it still has to provide humane
services constantly all the time. I’m just wondering whether in that
regard whether you feel it could have — within its ambit of activities
could have done something more or taken a different route.

Cummings: As I think I told you in the first session XE "education" \\r
"educ2" , I’ve come to believe that the most important role a powerful
humane organization can play is in the field of humane education. I
won’t say that there are some things that we could have done, but one of
the disappointments is that we haven’t been able to do more in humane
education. I’ve come to view humane education a little differently than
I used to. I think that — although I don’t think it’s impacted
negatively on us at all. I think that we failed to take a position many,
many years ago that we pretty much take today, that any publicity we can
get for the humane movement is good publicity — animal cruelty, animal
abuse, animal problems and so forth — is positive. I think we’re doing a
much better job now of attempting to publicize humane issues as much as
we once \[did\].

Humane education when I first started consisted of a group of people
that went to classrooms and lectured kids on humane education, brought
little animals and showed them to the kids and sensitized the kids to
this. I don’t know how effective that was. You take a bunch of kids in
grammar school and expose them to animals — maybe it had an impact,
maybe it didn’t, but you’re operating on a very, very small slice of the
population. That was the thrust. Plus we had a magazine that used to
come out monthly. It was in those days called Our Dumb Animals XE "Our
Dumb Animals" .

I think now what we’re doing is much more effective XE "funding/finance"
\\r "funding4" . We’re working closely with the press XE "public
relations/outreach" \\r "funding4" . Our fundraising efforts today are
much more designed to publicize the humane movement. You can look at
them as just going out for money, but I think one thing I learned about
fundraising is it has a very strong and valuable educational component.
Even if you spend a hundred thousand dollars sometimes and you only get
fifty thousand dollars in, you may have gotten more for that fifty
thousand that you lost than you thought.

Rowe: You mentioned in the previous interview about how it got community
involvement, it made people feel invested in the process. Do you feel
that that kind of sophistication, that kind of larger thinking bigger in
terms of having a bigger splash, bigger reach in the media, but also in
humane education circles, could have been done earlier? Or do you think
it was a natural evolution?

Cummings: I think we might have done it earlier, Martin, if we realized
its value. Many, many years ago — if you’re going to do a direct mail
drive, you looked on that as what sort of a return do you get, how much
do you get per gift, and so forth and so on. But you didn’t really think
about it as something that benefits beyond just the fundraising and the
enlistment of additional members. We could have done that. Looking back,
if I had the benefit of forty years experience when I first began and
became active, I might have been doing a lot of this. I would have been
advocating doing a lot of the things that we do now then. But I don’t
know that there are necessarily any lost opportunities.

For instance, we’ve got this wonderful new complex in Springfield XE
"Massachusetts:Springfield" that we’ve built, and we probably could have
built that sooner. But we’ve got it and we didn’t lose any
opportunities, and we might not have been able to finance it sooner. So
I don’t know of any great lost opportunities that we’ve suffered.

Rowe: You mentioned that your fundraising or your direct mail pieces in
the past didn’t tend to emphasize humane education, that that was a
later development, that you did better at emphasizing humane education
in your outreach material. What was the outreach material like before?
How did it express the needs of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ?

Cummings: The first direct mail campaign that I remember, we hired a
company to put out what they call a Zip code mailing. They would
identify various places. First of all, they’d try to identify the
typical donor, the typical supporter. I think they determined that the
typical supporter was a white, 45-year-old housewife of at least middle
income level. So they tried to identify by Zip codes, by census tracts,
where the heaviest concentration of people like that live. Then they
make a mailing into that Zip code area — every house in the area.

Rowe: And the mailing consisted of what type of literature?

Cummings: It was “send us \$25 and it will support one dog in the
shelter” kind of thing. It didn’t do anything other than say that we’re
taking care of unwanted and stray animals, which is fine, and you can
help us do that by sending us \$25.

Rowe: Was there somewhat a sense of entitlement — “we’re doing this, you
should be nice to us” — rather than a kind of “you need to save the
animals.”

Cummings: No, it was more “you need to save the animals.” It wasn’t a
sense of entitlement. But it didn’t tell you an awful lot about the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" or the humane movement. I think the stuff that we put out now
is much more designed to publicize specific problems and the work that
we do and so forth, which is much better. It tells a lot of people about
us and tells people a lot about the problems that we work with.

Together with all the other — when you’re publicizing, you’ve got a —
well, we’re going to probably kick off — we haven’t decided to do this
but I’m sure we’re going to — a great campaign to improve our place up
at Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen" . Well, when we do that we’ll be
telling everybody what we do up there. That’s the center for our large
animal work. I would venture to say that very few people in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" who are not connected with the horse
world have any idea what we do with large animals up there. This will
give them a sense of it and I hope will enhance our value and also
sensitize people to the problems that large animals have in the
commonwealth.

Rowe: You have talked about the past XE "animal shelters" \\r "shelter3"
. In reading your literature there is a very great deal of building that
has been taking place over the last decade or so, the expansion of
facilities, and you’ve mentioned the different facilities and the
improvements that have been taking place. Do you feel that that’s the
direction that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" is best suited to pursue in the future, or
are there other avenues of activities that you think the MSPCA could be
involved with in the future?

Cummings: That’s a necessary activity, Martin. You build a new shelter,
and it seems you blink three times and it’s falling apart and you
realize that what you thought of as a new shelter is now twenty-five
years old.

Rowe: Right. So it’s a constant updating and expanding of the shelter
facilities.

Cummings: Right. Of all the facilities. What we recognized — it was at
least ten years ago — a need to upgrade almost all the facilities that
we have. We’ve been doing it gradually. Presently we’ve got a campaign
going to upgrade the headquarters and the hospital, the Angell Memorial
Animal Hospital XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" , which needs
renovation. It needs modernization and we need more space. So that’s a
major campaign. We’re probably going to be doing Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" the same time. We get those two things done, we
will have upgraded — not upgraded, we’ve rebuilt or built a new facility
in Springfield XE "Massachusetts:Springfield" , a new facility in
Nantucket XE "Massachusetts:Nantucket" . Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" will be essentially a new facility. The hospital
will be vastly renovated. We’ve got a new facility in Brockton XE
"Massachusetts:Brockton" now, a very nice shelter down there. The
shelter that I always thought of as a fairly new one in Centerville XE
"Massachusetts:Centerville" down on the Cape is — I think it’s probably
thirty years old now. That’s going to have to be upgraded. We’ve talked
over the years of relocating it. It’s in an area of very, very dense
traffic. It’s hard to get to in the summer and not a great spot for us
in the summer. It’s fine in the winter. Beyond that, as far as bricks
and mortar, we’d be in pretty good shape.

Rowe: How about campaigns in addition to that XE "trapping" \\r "trap1"
? What campaigns do you think the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" should be involved with,
because it’s been involved with campaigns, particular campaigns XE
"campaigning/lobbying" \\r "trap1" ?

Cummings: Yes.

Rowe: I will talk to Carter Luke XE "Luke, Carter" about what has been
done. As a chairman, what you would like to see, not you would
necessarily demand that they do, but the kinds of things you personally
would like to see.

Cummings: I think the campaigns that we put on are dictated almost as
much by what we see as the needs of the present, Martin. We just
completed — this is a campaign that will probably go on as long as any
of us are alive, the leg-hold trap campaign. We very successfully —

Rowe: This is to ban the steel jaw leg-hold trap in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" .

Cummings: Yes. You can never let up. Without getting into it — Luke XE
"Luke, Carter" might tell you the details. But the people that promote
the leg-hold traps stay around forever. They’re constantly introducing
legislation to weaken our legislation, and they’re constantly doing
things to make us look bad. This is at the state government level. We’ve
got a governor who isn’t too sympathetic to humane things. I think he’s
— if you read the papers, as of today he hasn’t got a very good chance
of becoming a two-term governor, hopefully.

You want to talk about specific campaigns. I can’t tell you that I can
see myself — Luke XE "Luke, Carter" might have some — I can’t see any
campaigns that I think that we haven’t engaged in or that won’t be
dictated by where we see the needs are that I’d want to see the society
participate in.

I think what we might be looking at once we get — this is probably after
I’m gone. We might take a look — and we have done this from time to time
— to see whether there are any areas of the commonwealth that we should
be active in that we’re not, where we should have a shelter. Whether we
can serve some other places that we’re not serving. At one time we had a
shelter out in Pittsfield XE "Massachusetts:Pittsfield" , and we
determined that it was better to turn that over to a local group rather
than to try to serve that from Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . We
did, and it’s worked out very well. So in a sense you’ve got take a look
at what really from an efficient standpoint we can serve well rather
than have local people do it. Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" is not a
big state but it’s pretty densely populated. It’s one of the things you
have to overcome when you go west, is the people in the west don’t like
the people in the east at all. The people in the east don’t dislike the
people in the west, but they just don’t know they’re there, and that
infuriates the people in the west.

Rowe: I thought you were hinting as much in your first interview.
There’s an aim to make the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" really the MSPCA, not the
EMSPCA.

Cummings: Yes. This is one good thing about what we’ve done in
Springfield XE "Massachusetts:Springfield" . That covers not just
Springfield. That facility serves part of northern Connecticut XE
"Connecticut" , southern Vermont XE "Vermont" , southwestern New
Hampshire XE "New Hampshire" , and even some people from New York XE
"New York" state. That’s done us a lot of good as far as getting away
from just being the Boston MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . It isn’t just the east, it’s
the Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" .

Rowe: It’s even more narrow.

Cummings: People from Boston to the people in Springfield XE
"Massachusetts:Springfield" are bad people.

I haven’t thought a lot about campaigns and programs. As I say, I’d like
to see us do more in humane education and publicity.

Rowe: Any particular aspect of humane education or a way of talking
about animals, or do you mean just do more outreach, more programs XE
"education" \\r "educ3" ?

Cummings: I’ll tell you what I’m thinking of as I’ve come to regard this
XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "educ3" . It’s sort of a PR campaign
at every level, just publicizing as much as you possibly can what the
problems are. I’m convinced that in most cultures, and even in emerging
nation cultures, the cruelties that are being perpetuated on the animal
kingdom are being done through ignorance and thoughtlessness rather than
malicious intent. Most people don’t mean to be cruel to an animal, but
they just don’t think about what they’re doing with an animal. They fail
to regard it as a sentient being. It’s like a piece of furniture. They
never stop to think about how the animal is suffering from thirst or
hunger or the elements or pain or anything. When you sensitize that
thought process — we’ve always thought, of course, that you try to do
this at an early age with kids, and that’s very important. But I think
it goes beyond just the kids. I think it goes to the entire population.

Rowe: In that regard, the final question would be, as a human being
who’s worked in this for many years, are you optimistic about the
future? Are you realistic that there will always be cruelty, there are
always issues that need to be dealt with? You’ve mentioned that it’s
always a challenge to stop the trappers associations from weakening
legislation even after all this time. You’ve also said that it’s
impossible to dialogue at times with the medical establishment about the
cruelties of vivisection. They wouldn’t consider themselves cruel people
either, but there are cruelties there and they’re certainly not ignorant
of those cruelties. Are you optimistic about the possibilities that
humane education will ultimately ameliorate the conditions of animals in
a sort of general trend of more humane methods, or do you think it’s
stopping the flood constantly with the finger in the dike?

Cummings: No, I wouldn’t say that XE "transporting animals" \\r
"transport2" , Martin XE "slaughtering of animals" \\r "transport2" .
I’d say that if anyone has utopian dreams, forget it. But I’ve seen —
sometimes you get very discouraged. It seems like you’re taking two
steps forward and three steps back. But I’ve seen some very steady
improvement on a worldwide basis as well as in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" in the treatment of animals and the sensitivity to these
things. I take a look at some of the improvement that’s been made by the
humane community.

Look at slaughter, for instance. Nobody wants to talk about humane
slaughter. That’s something that’s very hard to publicize. People want
to believe that you somehow grow meat in the garden. Years ago there
were absolutely no humane slaughter laws. Now we have humane slaughter
laws pretty much all over the world. There is still a lot of inhumane
slaughter perpetuated. But in the United States in general you have
humane slaughter. In most civilized countries there are strong humane
slaughter laws. There are strong animal transportation laws. You’re now
talking hundreds of millions of animals that are impacted by this. I try
to remind people of this that we worry about —

Rowe: Millions of millions of animals. Nine billion animals in the
United States.

Cummings: Yes. What I try to say, “We worry about stray dogs and cats,
which is very important, but the impact of what we do on transporting
animals and slaughtering animals with regard to cruelty has much bigger
impact than what we do on the stray animal population.”

Rowe: But laws are in place. Do you feel that the public has somehow
inured themselves to the larger suffering or that they’ve said, “There
are laws in place. I don’t have to worry about them.” Are the laws being
enforced?

Cummings: I think by and large the laws that we have on the books are
being enforced. There’s the lab animals act. We regulated animal
experimentation XE "animal experimentation and testing" . That could be
better, it could be enforced better, and so forth and so on. But we’ve
got laws on the books for this now, Martin. I’ve seen that XE "law and
legislation" \\r "law3" .

I think people, again, in countries like the United States, people are
much more sensitive to spaying and neutering XE "spaying and neutering"
animals. I think people are really aware of the problem of surplus
companion animals and the need to deal with that than they used to be. I
think progress is being made in these areas. A few years ago, if you had
talked about some of the evils in zoos XE "zoos" , people wouldn’t —
it’s still a hard deal. It’s the place you take the kids on Sunday. But
people now are becoming very much aware that it’s terribly inhumane to
take an animal like a tiger or a lion and lock them up in a little cage.

I think there’s a lot more awareness. I see progress coming. I can see
more progress. I’m not pessimistic about the future. I don’t have any
illusions about the speed with which progress is going to be made,
Martin.

Rowe: Is it constant speed or do you think it’s speeding up a little?

Cummings: It’s speeding up a little. One of the things that I think has
helped a great deal to sensitize the public is television. Now you can
get — if you’ve got a cable you can get a hundred channels and there are
animal channels and Discovery XE "Discovery Channel" channels. You can
see all kinds of stuff on television that people would never, ever have
seen before. We’ve got this widespread television. Even when television
first started, you’d have typically three or four channels. With the
exception of the educational channels, you’d never see anything much
about animal cruelty. My wife saw that —

Rowe: The “20/20 XE "20/20" ” program.

Cummings: The puppy mill thing. That’s a commercial channel. I turned on
the Discovery Channel XE "Discovery Channel" the other night. I saw this
in — it was listed in the program guide — about the prison rodeos. Did
you ever hear of the prison rodeo? They had a program on this prison
rodeo. I watched it for about twenty minutes, and I said, “Sheesh, this
is the worst thing I’ve ever seen in my life.” You want to combine
cruelty to people and cruelty to animals — did you ever see anything
about this?

Rowe: I know about it. Just describe for the interview purposes what
happens briefly.

Cummings: Okay. What they do is they run it out of the Louisiana State
Penitentiary XE "Louisiana State Penitentiary" . This is one of the most
notorious prisons in the country. If you’re sentenced to life in that
penitentiary, you’ll probably die in it. They don’t let anybody out.
They’re pretty hard-core criminals in the place.

They run a rodeo every year. Many of these guys that participate in the
rodeo have never seen a steer or a horse before they went to prison.
They do things like — they have a bull-riding contest. Well, rodeos have
these. But instead of one guy coming out on a bull, they have six people
come out on a bull simultaneously. The bulls are throwing these guys
down. The guys are getting kicked in the head. They get stomped on. It’s
just a mess of people and animals in this stage. It’s cruel for the
bulls and it’s terrible for these convicts. They do a similar thing with
horses. They have three-people teams to try to hold a wild horse down so
some guy can get up on the back of the horse. Now you’ve got eighteen
people in a ring with horses. God knows how they get them to buck the
way they did. You couldn’t see close enough to see what they had.

\[End Tape 2, Side A; Begin Tape 2, Side B\]

Cummings: What you do is you have the traditional cruelties to the
animals that you see in any rodeo. But in addition, you’ve got people
just getting — I didn’t watch it long enough. Maybe they give you the
statistics at the end of it. But if people don’t get killed doing that,
it’s a miracle XE "violence towards animals and humans" \\r "rodeo" .
They certainly get smashed all to pieces doing it. It reminded me of
something you might have seen in the Coliseum a couple of thousand years
ago XE "rodeos" \\r "rodeo" .

Rowe: It reinforces the idea actually — which takes us back to the
beginning of the interview — that the issue of violence against human
beings and violence against animals is not just perpetrated by criminals
on the innocent. It’s a culture and cycle of victimization that takes
place when you have people incarcerated or beings incarcerated with each
other and the kind of violence that is brewed along those lines. I would
like to conclude it there. Thank you very much.

\[End of Session\].

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

INDEX \\h " " \\c "1" \\e " "

20/20 \[television program\] 31, 39

African-Americans 22

American Kennel Club (AKC) 31

Angell Memorial Animal Hospital 3, 11, 13, 15, 23, 36

animal experimentation and testing 3–7, 18–20, 39

animal pounds

pound seizure 3-7

Animal Rescue League 4, 6, 20, 21

animal rescues 10–11

animal rights movement/animal protection community 8–9, 21–22

animal shelters 13–16, 18, 23, 36

Australia 26, 27

California 23

campaigning/lobbying 36–37

Canada 17

Connecticut 22, 23, 37

cows 25

Davies, Brian 16, 17

DeSalvo, Albert 29

Discovery Channel 39

dogs 31

education 30–31, 34–36, 37–39

Egypt 26

England See Great Britain

Farnum, George 20

Florida 31

Ford Motor Company 12

France 25

funding/finance 12–13, 14–17, 20–21, 34–36

fur 16–17

Great Britain 16, 27

London 10

Great Depression 9

Hanson, Eric 1, 2, 5, 6, 10

Harvard Club 21

Harvard University 4, 5, 20

horses 24–26

Humane Education Program 13

India 19

International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) 16

International Society for the Protection of Animals (ISPA) See World
Society for the Protection of Animals

Kilroy, Walter 1, 3, 7, 28, 29, 31

Larson, Sandi 19

law and legislation 3–8, 24–26, 28–32, 38–39

Louisiana State Penitentiary 39

Luke, Carter 33, 36, 37

Maine 11

managing an organization 22–23, 32–34

Marks, \_\_\_\_\_\_ 21

Massachusetts 3, 4, 6, 8, 22, 23, 25, 31, 32, 36–38

Boston 4, 15, 20, 22, 23, 37

Brockton 14, 15, 23, 36

Centerville 36

Hyannis 17, 33

Martha’s Vineyard 13

Methuen 23–25, 36

Nantucket 13, 14, 36

Pittsfield 23, 37

Springfield 15, 22, 23, 35–37

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)
1–6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 17–21, 23, 25, 28–31, 33–37

medicine/medical community 18–20

Mercury Engines 12

New England Antivivisection Society (NEAVS) 19–21

New Hampshire 23, 37

New York 23, 37

Albany 23

Brooklyn 27

New York City 14, 20

New Zealand 26, 27

Operation Gwamba 10

Our Dumb Animals 34

Panama 11, 12

Peabody, Brown, Rowley & Story 2

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 17

Plant, Colin 10

public relations/outreach 8–9, 15–17, 34–36, 37–39

religion

Islam 26–27

Judaism 26–27

Rhode Island 23

rodeos 39–40

Rowley Memorial Animal Hospital 15, 23

Rowley, Charlie 2

Rowley, Francis 2

Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) 9, 10

Scott, Trevor 10

seals 16–17

slaughtering animals 19, 25–27, 38

snakes 1

Snelly, Gary 13

spaying and neutering 15, 39

Stamper, Merrill 13

Surinam 10

Therin, Peter 19

transporting animals 19, 25–27, 38

trapping 36–37

Trumm, \_\_\_\_\_\_ 5, 6

United Brands 12

United Fruit Company See United Brands

vegetarianism 19

Vermont 23, 37

veterinary medicine 23

violence towards animals and humans 8, 28–29, 31–32, 39–40

Virginia 24, 25

Walsh, John 10–12

wildlife (in general) 10–11

Wilkes & Gray 4

World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) 9–11, 13, 16, 17, 25,
26, 28

World War II 9

Yale University 28, 29

zoos 39
