---
---

This edited transcript is the product of tape-recorded interviews
conducted by Martin Rowe with Walter Kilroy in Boston, Massachusetts on
December 3, 1999 and April 28, 2000 for Recording Animal Advocacy.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 - December 3, 1999

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

1

Parents very kind to animals; fond memories of Mission Hill,
Massachusetts neighborhood; early interest in snakes and wildlife –
Detesting bullies and feeling sorry for underdogs being the main reason
for helping animals; rescuing lead-painted turtles around age 10;
interacting with other children – Applying for and being interviewed for
a job at the MSPCA’s Angell Memorial Hospital at age sixteen; working as
kennel attendant – Experiences with and views on euthanizing animals –
Rescuing wild animals – As ambulance driver in the 1950s, removed
neglected dogs for medical research kept in a farm; thoughts on the
penalty imposed – One of the worst cases in which punishment of the
animal abusers was not severe enough.

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

The need to strengthen animal abuse laws; possible reasons why there has
been resistance to this change – Types of individuals in MSPCA’s law
enforcement department and within the police force who help animals –
MSPCA’s legislative and other activities in the 1950s – Experiences
working in American Fondonk veterinary hospital and shelter (Fez,
Morocco) in 1961–62; improvements it has made over the decades;
attitudes to animals in Morocco – MSPCA’s setting up a public relations
department and starting to use the media to spread its message in the
early 1960s – Wife did not mind WK bringing animals home; rescuing and
bringing home a bald eagle in the 1960s; lifelong interest in wildlife,
in particular herpetology.

Session 2 – April 28, 2000

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

Leg-hold trapping: involvement with citizen’s committee to research
leg-hold trapping in the early 1970s and initiation of activities that
led to restrictions on use of body-gripping traps; law passed because of
publicity given to and media interest in the issue; the law was
difficult to enforce; a subsequent law (“Question One”) had more severe
restrictions – Reasons why overpopulation of animals far greater in
1960s and 70s than the 1990s: humane societies did not let public know
the number of animals killed; resistance to and lack of education on
spay/neuter; reluctance to veterinary community to accept spay/neuter –
Problems with pet shops: lack of effective system of enforcing rules and
regulations; there has never been a suspension or revocation of
licenses; within the past ten years, MSPCA appealed to and obtained
substantial changes to licensing rules.

\[Tape 2, Side B\] . . . . .

More on pet shops: examples of improvements and regulations that still
need to be changed; enforcing regulations too time-consuming and
cumbersome – Zoos: although positively influenced by zoos as a child,
now have reservations about them because of empathy for the captive
animals; overseeing completion of “African tropical forest” in Franklin
Park Zoo; blowing whistle on Boston Zoological Society and directing an
investigation that resulted in major changes at Franklin Park Zoo –
Involvement of women in animal protection work in the past and present;
women’s sensitivity toward animals; influence of women on the
development of MSPCA in recent decades – Success of environmental
movement in the 1970s facilitated and gave credibility to the emerging
animal rights movement – Education is the most effective way to help
animals – Proud of the sustained efforts made and having stayed in the
work for so long; regretted not having ended drowning of “nuisance
wildlife” and pet shop problems.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

December 3, 1999

Boston, Massachusetts - Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals

Session of 1-1/2 hour

April 28, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts - Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals

Session of 1-1/3 hour

Interviewer:

Martin Rowe (author, editor, publisher)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Kilroy. Lee prepared the introductory
material and index.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Born in Boston in 1939 to parents who were very kind to animals, Walter
Kilroy’s interest in animals started in his childhood, rescuing snakes,
wildlife, and lead-painted turtles. His interest in and concern for
wildlife, in particular snakes, remained with him throughout his life.

In 1955 Kilroy joined the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA), first as kennel attendant, then as
veterinary nurse, ambulance and rescue driver at its Angell Memorial
Hospital. For the next four decades, he held various positions in the
organization, including: law enforcement / prosecuting officer
(1959-60); Assistant Director of the American Fondouk - a
MSPCA-affiliated animal hospital and shelter in Fez, Morocco (1961-62);
Assistant Director of Law Enforcement (1963-67); Administrative
Assistant to the President (1973-75); Director of Operations (1976-77);
Vice President & Registered Lobbyist (1977-84); Executive Vice President
(1985-87); Director of Law Enforcement (1989-present). He also served as
management consultant in the project to complete the construction and
programming of the African Tropical Forest at the Franklin Park Zoo in
1988-89. Among the issues he has been involved with and written on are
wildlife, trapping, zoos, pet shops, and overpopulation of animals.

Walter Kilroy

Session \#1

December 3, 1999

Boston, Massachusetts

Martin Rowe, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Rowe: Walter, you mention in your biographical material that you’ve
acquired, from some of these articles that you’ve sent me over the years
— and we’ll have these attached to the interview so that people can
refer to them more specifically — that your mother XE "Kilroy,
\[mother\]" and father XE "Kilroy, \[father\]" took in neighborhood
strays —

Kilroy: Absolutely.

Rowe: — in your neighborhood and that people brought animals to your
parents. They were kind of the refuge for all the strays about there.
How did that come to be? How did they decide to do this?

Kilroy: I’m not certain other than I know from my very earliest memories
that both my mother XE "Kilroy, \[mother\]" and father XE "Kilroy,
\[father\]" had a real soft spot in their heart for animals. That was
recognized by everybody in the neighborhood, and if anybody found a
stray dog or a stray cat or an orphaned bird XE "birds" \\r "bird1" ,
you know, I’m sure what came to mind most immediately was to bring it to
Mr. or Mrs. Kilroy. I can recall at a very, very early age raising
pigeons in particular from being absolutely featherless to being
fully-feathered and ultimately to being released and spending literally
hours, and watching my mother XE "Kilroy, \[mother\]" spend hours,
feeding — hand-feeding — pigeons. Of course, we lived not all that far
from MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" \[Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals\] and Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" Memorial
Animal Hospital, within a fifteen minute walk.

Rowe: Fifteen minutes walk away.

Kilroy: So anytime an animal was in need of medical attention or was a
stray animal, and certainly by the time I could navigate my way to MSPCA
XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" and Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" , my mother XE
"Kilroy, \[mother\]" would have me bring the animal in to MSPCA or
Angell Memorial. And my father XE "Kilroy, \[father\]" , as a matter of
fact, I can remember as a youngster for a number of years, raised
canaries and loved birds. So it was a natural sort of evolution.

Rowe: Did they say anything to you about caring for animals or was it
just their doing it and you just naturally followed their example?

Kilroy: Oh, no. They thought it was important that I be humane and to
help care for the animals as well. I remember very early on, you know, I
had a very, very strong interest in wildlife. The only wildlife that I
could lay my hands on as a youngster were vacant lot varieties of
snakes, most notably smooth green and dekay snakes XE "snakes" . I used
to go out and catch them and keep them. It’s interesting looking back
now. My father XE "Kilroy, \[father\]" in particular found that somewhat
offensive. He found it offensive that I would keep these snakes in
captivity. He thought it was inappropriate. He allowed me to do it and
he even supported it, but he wasn’t pleased with it.

Rowe: What did he say to you about it?

Kilroy: He felt badly for them. He thought it was unnatural, it was
inappropriate. He felt sorry for the snakes and it bothered him to see
them in captivity even though he allowed me to keep them in captivity XE
"snakes" .

Rowe: Now, what was their background, your parents’ background? Had they
been the son and daughter of animal lovers? Had there been a long
history of this?

Kilroy: Not that I’m aware of. And I have to admit that I don’t know a
great deal about their early history. I do know that my mother XE
"Kilroy, \[mother\]" lost her biological mother at the age of twelve,
and her father remarried. So at that point in time she was an only
child, and then she had several step-siblings. My father XE "Kilroy,
\[father\]" grew up in a typical sort of traditional Irish Catholic
strongly-disciplined family. He had — I can’t remember right now without
stopping and counting — many brothers and sisters, as a matter of fact.
My father XE "Kilroy, \[father\]" also kept pigeons, pigeons that could
come and go, but he raised pigeons as well.

Rowe: He didn’t race them or anything like that, did he?

Kilroy: No, no. He just enjoyed keeping them. But both of my parents,
you know, were very, very fond of and very respectful of animals and
very intolerant of cruelty of any kind.

Rowe: Was this also true of your siblings? Were they interested in
caring for animals as well?

Kilroy: You know, when I think back, not to the extent that I was.
They’re all very humane and sensitive — and I have, in fact, three
sisters and two brothers. But none of them ever pursued a career having
to do with animals.

Rowe: Which number were you in the — you’re fairly far down the line.

Kilroy: I’m sort of in the middle actually. I have an older sister and
an older brother. I have two younger sisters and a younger brother. So
I’m sort of right in the middle.

Rowe: Did they — your siblings — think of you as somewhat quirky to be
rooting around for wildlife in the parking lots?

Kilroy: I think everybody thought I was quirky for having an interest in
snakes XE "snakes" . People always thought that was strange.

Rowe: Now, you’ve written about snakes. Can you summarize for me why you
found them so fascinating as a child, do you think?

Kilroy: Well, of course, the snakes I was accustomed to dealing with at
that time were very innocuous. They were non-aggressive. They were not
snakes inclined to bite. I also found them, frankly, quite beautiful —
you know, smooth green snakes are a brilliant green and very graceful.
And they were representative of wildlife, and I found that very
appealing at that time. I still do, for that matter. And they were also,
you know — and that became apparent to me early on — widely
misunderstood, and that bothered me, in fact XE "snakes" . \[Tape
interruption\].

Rowe: Tell me about the neighborhood, Mission Hill, in the 1940s and
50s. What was its makeup? What type of class?

Kilroy: It was certainly a middle class and lower middle class,
essentially blue collar neighborhood. For the most part, three-decker
homes. Most of the residents during my childhood were relatively
permanent residents with very little moving in and out of the
neighborhood. It was largely Irish Catholic. Everybody seemed to know
everybody. It was actually in those days a nice neighborhood. I mean, my
memories of Mission Hill are very warm and fond memories frankly.

Rowe: And a strong neighborhood community. Were there lots of stray
animals at that time?

Kilroy: No, I wouldn’t say that there were a lot of stray animals. There
were certainly a lot of people who had pets, who had either a pet cat or
a dog or perhaps even more than one cat or more than one dog, although I
don’t ever recall seeing anybody having a great many pets. I can
remember one family who raised chickens in their backyard. I have fond
memories of Mission Hill and those days.

Rowe: Now, was there an overbreeding problem at all? Did people spay and
neuter XE "spaying and neutering" in those days or really it wasn’t
done?

Kilroy: I don’t recall that spaying/neutering was a widespread practice
in those days. On the other hand, I must say I don’t recall — and maybe
I was simply ignorant of the problem — but I don’t recall there being an
overpopulation problem either. You certainly wouldn’t have any
difficulty, nevertheless, acquiring a pup or a kitten because there was
always somebody in the neighborhood during the times of the year when
kittens and pups are apt to be born when there would be a litter of pups
or a litter of kittens that people were seeking homes for.

Rowe: Now, when people came to you — which is such a fascinating thing
that people come to you and say, “The Kilroys will take care of it.”
What did they say? What did they say about, “Oh, we just found the
animal.”

Kilroy: Sure. It was just a case of, you know, “We found this orphaned
pigeon,” or, “We found this stray cat and somebody told us that you’d be
able to take care of it. Will you take it or will you take care of it?”
It was just very natural. It never even occurred to me to think that was
unusual or strange back at that time. But when I think back, I don’t
know anybody else to whom area residents brought animals of these kinds.
I just do not.

Rowe: Right XE "children and animals" \\r "child1" . So you were unique
in that regard XE "psychological aspects" \\r "child1" . Now, I also
found fascinating your stories as a child how you rescued turtles that
had been painted with lead paint, rescued them by stealing them from a
shop and then releasing them into a creek. And you were only stopped by
the presence of a very large policeman saying that you will go to jail
if you do that any further. You also stopped a boy from killing a duck,
a wounded duck. You got beaten up as a result. He was a sixteen- or
seventeen-year-old boy who beat you up. And you were appalled when local
residents basically beat down a raccoon from a tree and killed the
animal. I’ve been trying to find out why certain children respond so
powerfully to animals. Obviously you had your parents as examples here,
but you were willing to put yourself against the law, you were willing
to put yourself at personal risk, and social risk in the case of the
raccoon, to protect animals. What was going through your head at that
time as a young person, as a young boy? What were you thinking about?
Was there any larger issue that was going through your head?

Kilroy: No. I’ve never been able to stand cruelty directed at animals or
people. I’ve always detested anybody who engages in bullying behavior.
For as far, as long, as I can remember I’ve detested bullies. Even today
I have a great deal of difficulty witnessing a person being subjected to
either physical or psychological pain. I detest it when somebody
humiliates or embarrasses another person. I can’t explain where that
comes from really because I honestly don’t know. I do know that I often
identify with the underdog. I have always had a tendency to feel that
animals in particular are inoffensive. They don’t provoke abuse,
generally speaking. They certainly don’t deserve abuse. I just have no
patience with abuse. But I would say that those feelings are just as
strong when it comes to people. I have the same, very much the same,
reaction to people.

I think if I have a capacity for being cruel at all — and I think I do —
it would be to be cruel to a person who had subjected something else to
unspeakable cruelty. I even find that something of an inconsistency
within myself, and it’s only been in very recent years that I’ve begun
to sort of wonder about that myself. I don’t understand that entirely.

Rowe: Was there a sense in helping the animal, in rescuing the animal —
the turtles particularly who would have died because of the lead-based
paint if they had not been rescued — was there a sense of injustice as
well? Was there a sense that this was a right thing to do as well as to
stop the pain XE "animal rescues" \\r "rescue1" , even if it’s a very
primitive, childlike form XE "turtles" \\r "rescue1" ?

Kilroy: Oh, yes. I think I equated death — and certainly when I was a
younger person; I don’t necessarily feel that way today — but equated
death with suffering. You have to remember, the way in which I became
aware of and concerned about the practice of painting turtles is, in
fact, through the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and in visiting the MSPCA, which was then on
Longwood Avenue. They had published a pamphlet called “The Eternal
Turtle.” Part of that pamphlet decried the practice of selling these
novelty turtles, these little red-and-yellow-eared sliders, and in fact
painting them with lead-based paint. They showed a photograph of the
effects of that over a period of time. I had actually seen that happen
to turtles. So I just embarked upon a campaign to save as many of these
turtles as I could. And I must say I didn’t save a great many of them
before I was caught. I was a pretty clumsy thief, frankly. I wasn’t too
sophisticated.

Rowe: Did you tell your parents about it?

Kilroy: I did. I did, but only because the police officer that was
called when I was caught instructed me to go home and tell my parents
because he would be contacting my parents, so I had better tell them
before he did. So I must admit, I was terrified. I had a father XE
"Kilroy, \[father\]" who was a strong disciplinarian. I well remember
how I was terrified, but I went home and told my parents. Incidentally,
the police never, of course, contacted my parents. Nevertheless, the
approach employed by the policeman in this instance was very effective.

Rowe: What did your father XE "Kilroy, \[father\]" say?

Kilroy: He was pretty upset, as was my mother XE "Kilroy, \[mother\]" .
But they were also understanding. It was a common practice when I was
growing up to be grounded — grounded meaning I was to stay in for a
week. And that was a long time to be confined to the house. But I recall
in this instance I was only confined for a couple of days because they
were also understanding of the motive but felt that it was the wrong way
to deal with it.

Rowe: Did they get involved with the issue after that?

Kilroy: No, I don’t recall that they ever did.

Rowe: What happened when you were fourteen years old when you got beaten
up by the sixteen- or seventeen-year-old?

Kilroy: I don’t think I ever told my parents about that. Also, I grew up
in a neighborhood where your status was determined in part by how tough
you were and how well you could fight. It was embarrassing to lose a
fight, and I’m sure I didn’t tell anyone.

Rowe: So it was a hard neighborhood. It was a tough but close
neighborhood.

Kilroy: Yes. It was just the same. It was a fairly tough neighborhood.

Rowe: But you were XE "children and animals" \\r "child2" , I mean,
clearly a sensitive child, but you also had that — did you have that
toughness as well? You were willing to put yourself on the line for it,
or was that very much that you had that veneer of toughness but
underneath you were feeling real sympathy and sorrow for the underdog?

Kilroy: Oh, I always felt sympathy and sorrow for the underdog, but I
was never a person willing to walk away from any kind of a confrontation
or any kind of a challenge, and whether or not that was a product of
growing up in an almost gang-like situation — not gang in the same
fashion as we see gangs today — but with a fairly substantial group. And
there was sort of a pecking order that was pretty much determined by the
toughest guy who was at the top of that pecking order with the second
toughest being next in that pecking order and so on.

Rowe: Did you talk about your care and concern for animals with your
friends and people in the gang?

Kilroy: Oh, sure.

Rowe: What did they say.

Kilroy: There was no question that — I don’t think they ever found it
strange at all. They found my interest in snakes strange, although also
found it somewhat fascinating because as I got older and, in fact, had
opportunities to acquire more exotic snakes, they were also sort of
fascinated and mesmerized by them.

Rowe: You became kind of cool as well.

Kilroy: In a sense. Strange, but also, somewhat entertaining probably
would be a better description in the eyes of many of my friends.

Rowe: Did they have any nicknames for you that reflected that interest
in animals?

Kilroy: No. I don’t remember that.

Rowe: Were there other people that shared your interest in animals that
you hung around with?

Kilroy: For the most part, it was just hanging around with friends. I
can remember one kid of my age from the family that raised the chickens
who had some interest in animals, including wild animals. I can remember
he and I, in fact, managed to capture an injured duck from a pond right
near to here. It was unable to fly but it could swim real well. After
much effort, we finally captured it. There were actually three of us
involved, and we brought the duck to Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal
Hospital" Memorial Animal Hospital. A veterinarian examined it. We were
all equally concerned about the well-being of that duck at that time.
I’ve lost contact with both of those individuals so I have no idea where
they are or what they’re doing today.

Rowe: So you came to Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital"
hospital very regularly.

Kilroy: Fairly often.

Rowe: When did you start visiting the hospital?

Kilroy: My guess — and it is a guess because I can’t remember clearly —
but I would say, based on when I started stealing turtles, that it would
have been by the age of ten or eleven.

Rowe: And what did you do when you visited here? You were just bringing
animals in?

Kilroy: More often than not I was bringing an orphaned animal or a stray
animal, but while I was there I would visit the shelter sometimes. But
most often it was just to bring a stray or an injured animal. On
occasion it was with my mother XE "Kilroy, \[mother\]" because we had
always had a dog, at least, and sometimes a couple of dogs. We would be
bringing them in for a veterinary appointment as well.

Rowe: The XE "veterinary medicine" animals that were coming into the
hospital — what types of injuries had they suffered? This is a rather
long-term question, but have you noticed the injuries change over the
years or is it the same kinds of things happening to the animals brought
in fifty years ago are the same that happen today?

Kilroy: You know, I honestly have never paid a lot of attention to
whether or not there has been any change or difference. My inclination
is to believe that there hasn’t been a great deal of change. My
inclination is to believe that back then there were animals with
distemper and, you know, dogs most notably, and cats with things like
coryza and automobile accident victims with broken legs, or at least
they were limping. I didn’t necessarily know it was a broken leg. And
animals with abscesses, infections and so on. But I honestly don’t know
whether or not there’s been change.

I would think — but this again is real speculation on my part — that
there might be fewer automobile accident victims today because animal
control, I think at least in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , is a lot
more effective today. It’s a lot more active today — leash laws, animal
control laws, and so on. So I think there are probably fewer dogs being
hit by cars then there were twenty, thirty, or forty years ago XE
"veterinary medicine" .

Rowe: And you became a ward attendant at the hospital at age sixteen.
Had you left school by that point?

Kilroy: That’s right.

Rowe: So you had — did you have any other plans perhaps then to work
with the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" and the animal hospital?

Kilroy: Well, you know, what I really wanted was simply to work with
animals. At that particular point in time, I just wanted to work with
the animals. I set out that day to go to three places in pursuit of a
job that would provide an opportunity to work with animals.

Rowe: When you say work with animals, what did you mean by work with
animals?

Kilroy: Hands-on care of animals really. It’s interesting, because I
knew about MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" . I also knew of the Animal Rescue League of Boston
XE "Animal Rescue League of Boston" . And I knew through childhood
experiences with the Children’s Museum XE "Children’s Museum" when they
had a live animal room that there was a place in Jamaica Plain called
Bussey’s Institute XE "Bussey’s Institute" , which was actually a place
at which animals were kept for research purposes, primarily rodents. I
set out that day to visit if possible and necessary three places —
Bussey’s Institute, MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , and the Animal Rescue League of Boston
XE "Animal Rescue League of Boston" . In fact, I believe — though it was
a long time ago — that I went to Bussey’s Institute first and filled out
an employment application but never went beyond filling out an
application.

Rowe: Because?

Kilroy: There were no vacancies. There were no opportunities, no job
openings. So I wasn’t interviewed. I was just invited to leave the
completed application.

I went from there to MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and I filled out another application.
Incidentally, I was told at the outset that there were no vacancies.
There were no positions available, but I was again invited to fill out
an application, at the end of which the supervisor or the superintendent
of the MSPCA’s Angell Memorial Hospital XE "Angell Memorial Animal
Hospital" , a gentleman that I was to become very fond of named Warren
Yanarella XE "Yanarella, Warren" , talked to me nevertheless,
interviewed me. It’s interesting, too, the difference between the way a
lot of youngsters apply today and the way I did. I went dressed in a
suit and shined shoes and a necktie and so on. He interviewed me
briefly, and apparently he was somewhat impressed with me. He told me
that he would like me to talk with the vice president then, who was a
gentleman by the name of J. Robert Smith XE "Smith, J. Robert" , whose
office was on the second floor.

So he sent me upstairs, gave me directions to J. Robert Smith’s office
and called Mr. Smith. Mr. Smith actually had two youngsters close to my
age at that time. He spent over an hour talking with me, and he told me
to go back downstairs and see Warren. By the time I got downstairs he
had obviously already talked with Warren by telephone, and I was hired
despite there being no job openings at that time.

Rowe: What did he talk with you about?

Kilroy: Just about my interest in animals and my history with animals,
so to speak, and my aspirations — and about his sons, as a matter of
fact.

Rowe: Now, do you think, in retrospect, it was your enthusiasm or your
knowledge or both that got you hired?

Kilroy: Actually, I really do think it was the sincerity of my
commitment, and his recognition of my desire to work with animals. I’m
sure that came across. I don’t remember trying to sell that in
particular. If anything, I would have been extremely nervous. Although I
remember I felt relaxed pretty early with both of these gentlemen.

Rowe: So you became a ward attendant XE "veterinary medicine" .

Kilroy: That’s right.

Rowe: What did that job involve?

Kilroy: It meant coming in at seven o’clock every morning and feeding
all of the animals in a hospital ward, usually working with another
person in that ward. There might have been fifty, sixty, seventy animals
in a ward, a significant number of them being dogs and the balance of
them being cats. They would have been in a ward because of disease or
injury. But it meant feeding them all and then exercising each one. I’m
talking about the dogs as far as exercising goes — exercising all of
them. And while they were being exercised, thoroughly cleaning their
cages. It usually also required that they all have their temperatures
taken and recorded, as well as any symptoms of their condition that were
appropriate to record on the medical record. And with the cats, the same
thing — it would be feeding, cleaning, temping, and recording.

Rowe: So you’ve written that you were a kennel attendant.

Kilroy: Same.

Rowe: That’s basically what you were involved with.

Kilroy: Right. Because most people today don’t understand the term “ward
attendant.” That’s what it was called back then at Angell XE "Angell
Memorial Animal Hospital" .

Rowe: Now, just remind me here, later on when you were involved with
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" you supported a bill which reduced the amount of time that
animals were kept from ten days to five days XE "euthanasia" \\r
"euthan1" .

Kilroy: That’s right.

Rowe: Because the great majority of animals that were adopted out or
returned to their owners were done so in the second or third days.

Kilroy: Usually, yes, within five days certainly. Eighty-five percent of
those that were returned were returned within three to five days.

Rowe: Were you aware of what happened to the animals after ten days, for
instance? What did happen to them? What was the euthanization procedure?

Kilroy: Oh, yes. The euthanasia procedure was — at least here in those
days — was performed with an IV injection of sodium pentobarbital. So
that’s what would happen here. In some of our shelters in those days, in
some instances the animals were put down with sodium pentobarbital and
in other instances it would have been with a carbon monoxide chamber. So
I was aware of — and, in fact, there was a time when one of my
responsibilities was that of euthanizing animals. There was also a time
before that when one of my responsibilities had been to restrain animals
while sodium pentobarbital was being administered.

Rowe: How did you feel about that XE "psychological aspects" \\r
"psych1" ?

Kilroy: That could be very difficult at times. There were always sort of
special animals. There were animals that just had a particular appeal.
It might be a very young pup, for example, that was deaf and was not
competitive for adoption purposes. That would bother me. Or a kitten
that reacted strongly to being euthanized. That would bother me a lot.

Rowe: How were you advised to handle that, or was there no advice given?

Kilroy: Back in those days there was really no attention paid to the
psychological implications and emotional impact of this practice. Of
course, I could have said, “I can’t do this.” I’m sure if I had said
that, that would have been respected and I wouldn’t have been asked to
do it, I wouldn’t have been expected to do it, whether it be restrain or
the actual administration of the sodium pentobarbital. But beyond being
relieved of such responsibilities, there were no other options available
such as counseling.

Rowe: But you could have — how did you make yourself be able to do that?
What resources did you call upon? Did you think about the larger issues?

Kilroy: I did. In fact — I mean, really — I think for a person who is
sensitive to be able to survive that, so to speak — and some people
don’t, incidentally — they have to recognize that the alternative is
less acceptable from the standpoint of humane considerations. I had said
to you earlier that early in my life I had certainly equated death with
suffering. And I also said, I think, that I don’t necessarily feel that
way today, and I don’t. I’m much more concerned today and have been for
a good many years now about the quality of life than the quantity of
life. I would much prefer to see an animal euthanized than to see one
suffer.

Certainly one of the things that we see in law enforcement that troubles
me — and not only in law enforcement; they certainly see it in the
veterinary profession in general, I’m sure — are people who cannot bring
themselves to having an animal euthanized that has been a pet for a long
time but that is suffering. They just can’t bring themselves to making
that decision. They can’t deal with the guilt that accompanies the
decision to allow the animal to be euthanized. And while I understand
that, because I’ve been there — I’ve had pets all my life and I know how
difficult it is — today it would be more difficult for me to allow —
much more — to allow one of my pets to suffer. I’ve had discussions with
people where I’ve tried to convince them that even though I understand
where they’re coming from and I can empathize with it and very much
relate to it, they’re really being more humane to themselves than to the
animal when, in fact, they allow it to continue to suffer because they
can’t deal with the guilt. They’re sparing themselves the discomfort at
the animal’s expense, and that can be troubling.

Rowe: Did you take some of the animals that came in for yourself and
adopt them out yourself?

Kilroy: I took tons of animals XE "birds" \\r "bird2" . I mean XE
"animal rescues" \\r "bird2" , during my early years I was always
bringing home — and you have to remember I had always had a strong
interest in wildlife — I took home countless baby raccoons and baby
screech owls and sparrow hawks and raised them.

Rowe: You were still living at home at this point.

Kilroy: Oh, yes. I can remember having large snapping turtles XE
"turtles" in the bathtub. I can also remember at other times having
dovekies in the tub. They’re little black and white birds that live well
offshore in the ocean and in certain storm conditions they get blown
ashore. They need a runway to takeoff — a water runway. When they get
blown inland and wind up on land, they just can’t get airborne. I can
remember going off looking for dovekies and keeping them in my bathtub
until I could get them to a body of water from which they could gain the
momentum and speed needed to get airborne.

Rowe: So these animals weren’t animals that came to the shelter. These
were animals you actually went out looking for.

Kilroy: Oh, no. Well, in some instances, yes, but also animals I took
from the shelter because in many instances the alternative would have
been to put them to sleep or to euthanize them. I found that difficult.
But even as recently as — I don’t know — twenty years ago, I had brought
home — on two separate occasions I brought home bald eagles that were in
need of rehabilitation and maintained them at home until they could be
released.

Rowe: Your parents were happy about the snapping turtles XE "turtles" in
the bathtub?

Kilroy: They weren’t crazy about that, to be sure. But, again, they
understood and never gave me any difficulty about it. I think there were
times when I probably kept animals longer than I should have. I think
they recognized that and they would say, “There’s no reason not to
release this animal at this point in time. It’s time for it to go.”

Rowe: You have said — you’ve written that you were amazed at the
cruelties inflicted upon animals, especially starvation. A number of
animals had just been left to starve when people have moved out of
apartments and just left their — what were some of the common cruelties
that you experienced working as a ward attendant when animals came to
you?

Kilroy: You know, it’s interesting. When I was working as a ward
attendant I really didn’t have that kind of exposure to cruelty. Most of
the animals that I was taking care of or involved with the care of were
animals that were owned by people who cared deeply about their animals
and who were bringing them to the hospital for veterinary medical
attention. So these were animals that were, generally speaking, very
well cared-for. So I didn’t see a lot of cruelty in my experience as a
ward attendant.

Rowe: After three years though XE "law and legislation" \\r "law2" ,
when you worked as an ambulance and rescue driver — as a rescue driver
you would have gone out and — you were rescuing animals from the streets
or were you rescuing them from homes XE "dogs" \\r "law1" ? Was this
affiliated with law enforcement XE "animal experimentation and testing"
\\r "law1" , because you then moved into law enforcement in ’59 XE
"laboratory animals" \\r "law1" .

Kilroy: Actually, in those days, as a matter of fact, the ambulance and
rescue service was administered by the law enforcement department. I had
spent almost three years as an ambulance and rescue driver, so I was
working out of the same office and with the same people as law
enforcement officers. In fact, the director of ambulance and rescue —
not that we had that title at that time — was the director of law
enforcement, then called the chief prosecuting officer.

What I can recall as an ambulance driver in one instance was
accompanying law enforcement officers to a piggery in Franklin XE
"Massachusetts:Franklin" . The purpose was to remove a number of dogs —
a significant number of dogs — from this piggery that had been being
used for medical research by a major medical facility in Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" . They were being used here in Boston, and when
they completed the procedures and so on that they were involved with,
they would return these animals to be boarded at this piggery in
Franklin, Mass. This was my first and worst early case of incredible
neglect. Many of these dogs were literally skin and bones — I mean,
literally skin and bones. They had previously undergone surgical
procedures and were being housed in ramshackle pigsties. They had been
being fed the same decomposed garbage that the pigs were fed and in the
same manner — from sawed-off, shallow, rusty, formerly fifty-gallon
barrels.

Rowe: So there were no actual pigs at this place. They were just —

Kilroy: There were some pigs, but they were kept independent of the
dogs. The dogs, however, were being kept in the same conditions and in
the same pens and so on — the same types of pens. They were being kept
in pens that had been designed and built for pigs. They were being fed
decomposed garbage, to the extent that they were being fed at all. The
ground in some of these pens was rock hard. There was, as I recall
anyway, a dog that had given birth to pups in there, and some of the
pups had been cannibalized by other dogs. It was a horrendous situation.

Rowe: How had you been called out to that? Had somebody alerted you?

Kilroy: What happened was — and again, this goes back to the 50s — that
somebody had discovered in the woods nearby the carcasses of a number of
dogs, some of which still had surgical dressings on them and displayed
other evidence of having undergone surgical procedures. The local police
had been notified, began an investigation and, in fact, traced these
carcasses to this piggery and called the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and its law
enforcement department. I happened to be one of the — in fact, I
happened to be the only ambulance driver that was dispatched with law
enforcement officers to begin the process of removing the dogs that were
there. And there were also dead dogs half-buried on the property with
limbs sticking up or part of the head exposed. It was just a horror
show.

Rowe: Who was responsible, both personally and also under law, for the
welfare of these animals, these dogs?

Kilroy: Actually, the person who operated the piggery, while he didn’t
have ownership of the dogs, had legal charge and custody of them, so he
was legally responsible. In fact, he was charged; he was prosecuted. My
recollection is he received six months in the house of correction and
some kind of a fine. I can’t remember the amount of the fine. The other
person that was charged was a doctor with this particular medical
facility, who they were able to establish should have known some of what
was going on. But also we were able to establish that these animals,
given their condition, were not suitable, from the standpoint of humane
considerations, for transportation. He was also charged with allowing
cruel transportation. His sentence was a lot lighter, frankly. I say
“sentence.” His sentence or his penalty actually was a fine. Hence, he
was found guilty. Although, as I mentioned, he was fined, I don’t
remember how much. There was no jail sentence and the fine wasn’t that
great. In his case, given his stature within the medical profession and
within the community, just having been prosecuted and convicted was a
pretty significant penalty for the time.

Rowe: So you had no problem with the end result of the investigation?
You felt that the perpetrators had been punished suitably and
satisfactorily?

Kilroy: No.

Rowe: You didn’t?

Kilroy: No, I did not.

Rowe: So explore that. You must have been furious, angry at this
treatment.

Kilroy: Well, I felt that the jail sentence for the person who was
responsible for taking care of these animals should have been greater.
Of course, the maximum sentence today is only a year under this
particular statute. It’s a misdemeanor statute. I don’t know what it
would have been then. It may have only been six months, so he might have
gotten the maximum. Again, I wasn’t that familiar with the laws then.
That wasn’t my position with the Society. But I also felt that the
doctor that was prosecuted should have gotten a much more severe penalty
because I’m convinced — I was convinced then — that he had to be aware
of the conditions under which these animals were being kept and
certainly had to have been aware of the condition of the animals
themselves, because those animals were being trucked back and forth
between this farm and this medical facility.

Rowe: Do you feel sort of generally that punishment for the crimes that
you have seen as a law enforcement officer over the years have been
generally — punishment has been very incommensurate with the amount of
crime XE "violence towards animals and humans" \\r "law2" ?

Kilroy: Oh, yes. I think the penalties — certainly the penalties that
are allowed for or provided for in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts"
today are much too mild. The penalties that are provided for by law are
not strong enough in many instances. I also think the penalties that are
imposed under those laws are very often terribly inadequate. You almost
never ever see anybody receive jail time. In many instances, cases are
disposed of by a continuance without a finding. If they don’t get into
any trouble in the next six months or year, then it’s dismissed without
any kind of a finding.

I can give you an example of a case that really outraged me XE "dogs"
\\r "dog1" . We had a case a few years ago in which, as I recall, three
gentlemen — gentlemen! That’s a misnomer. But three men were playing
cards one night and drinking in the apartment of one of them. The person
who owned the apartment had a dog, and the dog had apparently during the
course of the evening and into the early morning hours had needed to go
out to relieve itself and was ignored. Finally the dog relieved itself
on the floor of the apartment, in response to which the owner of the
apartment, owner of the dog, told his two friends to take the dog out
and kill it, get rid of it basically. In fact, I think he may have paid
them \$25 to do it.

The two friends took this dog — a nice dog, actually, female mongrel,
shepherd mongrel — took this dog behind a nearby warehouse, tied it to a
railing, and proceeded to beat it with a pool stick. They broke the pool
stick in the process of beating the dog. So then they proceeded to stab
it, and they stabbed it multiple times. While this stabbing — repeated
stabbings was in progress — this warehouse actually belonged to a
university, and campus police doing a routine security check came upon
this while it was still in progress. The two individuals took off into
night and disappeared. The campus police, to their credit — this dog was
bleeding profusely — put the dog right in their cruiser and they brought
it to Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" .

That’s all we knew. There were two people — no description really, they
disappeared much too quickly — and this dog. We assigned officers to
investigate and the officers canvassed the neighborhood. It’s a tough
neighborhood and not a neighborhood where it’s easy to get information.
We canvassed the neighborhood, spoke to all kinds of people, showed them
photographs of the dog, and tried to get somebody who could at least
identify the dog with a person, with an owner. No success. Talked to the
route mailman, talked to other route delivery men and so on. Nobody
could identify the dog with an owner or would. This went on at least a
few weeks without any worthwhile results XE "media" \\r "media1" , and
finally we went to the media and made an appeal for help — local
television stations and so on. Several of them did stories on this dog
and made an appeal for information with an assurance that we’d keep the
source of any information received confidential. We still didn’t get any
information.

So we offered a \$1,000 reward for information and went back to the
media with a request that they publicize the reward. Television stations
picked up on it again, did a follow-up on the dog — which, incidentally,
survived. Lo and behold, after the \$1,000 reward offering we did
receive a call from somebody who, as it turned out, proved to be a
relative of one of the individuals responsible. That individual gave us
information by which we were able to identify the three people,
including the owner of the dog. We actually wound up getting all of the
evidence we needed to prosecute all three.

In the instance of the two guys who did not own the dog, we were
actually able to charge them with a violation of a felony statute, the
maximum penalty for a violation of which is up to five years in state
prison and/or up to a \$1,000 fine. The owner we could only charge with
a misdemeanor violation, the maximum penalty for which is one year in
the house of correction and/or up to a \$1,000 fine. When the case was
prosecuted by the assistant district attorney who was assigned to do the
prosecution, as a part of the presentation made by that ADA, at the end
of the prosecution the ADA appealed to the judge to impose harsh
penalties. Incidentally, these three individuals had rap sheets — you
know what I mean — had records as long as your arm, some of which were
for violent crime.

In any event, at the end of it he made an appeal to the judge to impose
jail time, prison time, on all three of them. The judge’s response was,
“I see people in this court everyday who come in here that have been
stabbed and otherwise treated with violence and beaten and so on.” He
said, “They don’t get jail time. I’m not going to give these guys jail
time.” So they wound up with probation, I think a fine that was not that
severe, and I can’t remember what else. But it was certainly out of
proportion to the crime that was inflicted upon this dog. It was just
outrageous, and that happens.

Rowe: So having had forty years of bringing cases to court and
constantly finding that the punishment does not fit the crime, and this
case is a particularly acute example of this, why do you think generally
the judges are so unwilling to, as you would see it, make the punishment
fit the crime? What is the problem?

Kilroy: Well, in some respects I think it’s gotten worse, which is
really somewhat strange because I think in general people have become
increasingly more sensitive, increasingly more aware, increasingly more
concerned, increasingly willing to become involved. Certainly the media
jumps on animal abuse and animal neglect cases to an even much greater
extent, I think, today than it did many years ago. But I think the
courts have become increasingly desensitized through the amount of
violence that’s inflicted on people. They see — at least this is my
belief — they see so much violent crime involving people, in which
people are the victims, they become somewhat immunized and in many
instances aren’t giving as severe a sentence as perhaps they would if
this weren’t the case. But I think there’s often a tendency — not
always, incidentally, because there are exceptions, so I don’t want to
paint the entire system and all the judges with the same brush — but I
think there is often a tendency to feel that, well, this by comparison
nevertheless is just an animal and therefore I’m not going to impose the
kind of sentence that I might otherwise. I’m not sure that they think
that precisely, but I think that kind of a comparison may often take
place.

Rowe: Okay. I’m going to ask you to hold on that whilst I turn over this
side.

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

Rowe: Just to remind what we were talking about, that it’s somehow got
worse because of the desensitization because of the increasing violence
against human beings. There has been much work recently done by HSUS,
the Humane Society XE "Humane Society of the United States (HSUS)" , and
other people talking about how violence against human beings is often
marked by violence against animals. It’s related not only with young
children becoming sociopaths later on by inflicting violence, but also
by representing violence in the home when an animal is beaten up. Is
this something that you saw early on, or were you always aware of this
when you weren’t working as you did and started working in 1959 as a law
enforcement and prosecuting officer?

Kilroy: Did I see that a lot back in those days? No, I would have to say
— at least I don’t recall having seen a lot of that. Now, that isn’t to
suggest it wasn’t present. I’m not sure we were sensitized ourselves to
looking for that. I think even today there are probably instances — in
fact, I know, I’m sure there are instances — in which we may become
aware of an animal being abused but not necessarily be informed of the
abuse of a person within the same household or persons within the same
household.

I would like to go back, however, to the courts and the way they treat
animal cruelty for a moment. That is, the other influence, I think,
that’s at work on the kinds of sentences that are imposed, the severity
of penalties and so on, at least in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" —
and I think this is changing somewhat in some other states — is the laws
themselves don’t prescribe or allow for severe enough penalties. Now,
people say to me sometimes when I say this, “Well, if in fact they can
give them a year in the house of correction and they don’t give them
anything, you know, what difference is it going to make if they can give
them five years in the house of correction or ten years in state prison?
You know, if they don’t even use any part of a year, why would you think
that they would use some part of ten years?”

But I’m convinced that today a statute of the kind that we have, the
general anti-cruelty statute, in which the maximum sentence is a year
serves to trivialize the importance of animal abuse and cruelty. If it
said ten years or it said fifteen years, I think it would send a very
different message to the courts and to others than it does when it says
the maximum sentence is one year and that this is a misdemeanor, it’s
not a felony. So I’m inclined to believe that if we’re ever going to see
the courts treat animal abuse more seriously than they do in many
instances, it’s going to require a number of things, one of which is —

Rowe: Can I just — while you go on to that, I’d like you to also provide
the historical perspective. Has the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" been active in lobbying
for harder — for felonies to become — for misdemeanors to become
felonies?

Kilroy: Absolutely.

Rowe: How were you involved in that activity? And then if you can
reflect on the kinds of changes that still need to happen.

Kilroy: I actually was for a number of years the Society’s principal
lobbyist, so I was involved in the past in working with members of the
legislature to get the passage of legislation to strengthen animal
protection laws. I’m not doing that now and I haven’t done it for some
number of years. I’m not sure I remember the question. \[Laughter\].

Rowe: One was, you’ve now worked in law enforcement on and off for forty
years. It’s been forty years since you started doing it and you’ve seen
these shocking abuses. You have indicated that the situation has got
worse. You said you were involved in trying to push for stronger
legislation.

Kilroy: Well, I say I’m involved. I’m talking about the Society at this
stage not me personally.

Rowe: Right. Why has there been such resistance to changing the law and
how has the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" adapted to trying to push the strengthening
of the law?

Kilroy: You know, I don’t understand for the life of me why there is
resistance. I have no understanding at all of why there is such
resistance. I think to some extent it’s less a case of strong opposition
than it is a case of indifference — indifference in terms of compared to
other issues with which the legislature is dealing, this is not a major
issue, this is not an important issues, this is not an issue,
nevertheless, that everybody is clamoring to address, this is not a
problem that everybody is clamoring to remedy. So I think it’s more a
case of that than actual opposition.

Now XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper1" , there has
been some opposition in the recent past from XE "medicine/medical
community" \\r "exper1" , in one instance, a biomedical research
association, to increasing penalties because of a fear that those — the
changes in the law — would apply to people engaged in biomedical
research. It was absurd, as far as I’m concerned. It was actually
outrageous, because what we were looking for at that time was a change
in the general anti-cruelty law that would allow certain types of
malicious cruelty to be prosecuted as felonies and for which there would
be a much stronger penalty.

Rowe: When would have this been, this attempt?

Kilroy: Within the past five years. There was concern that somehow this
would apply to members of the biomedical research community. In fact, it
couldn’t, unless we were able to show and they were guilty of malicious
cruelty. And there’s a difference just the same — technically and
legally — between inflicting pain and suffering and cruelty upon an
animal with a malicious intent and being responsible for pain and
suffering of an animal not for malicious reasons or with malicious
intent but in connection with legitimate biomedical research. But
somehow there was this paranoia that this change was going to threaten
members of that community. That’s a fairly influential community within
the state of Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , so that certainly became
a stumbling block in the past, an unfortunate one.

Rowe: Have you found there resistance from the biomedical research
community in general over animal welfare issues that you’ve been
involved with over the period, because we’re talking your first
experience as a law enforcement officer was dealing with some aspect of
the biomedical industry in the piggery. Have you found that to be the
case or generally you haven’t had to deal with that?

Kilroy: No. I haven’t found that to be the case in general, to be honest
with you. I mean, I certainly was very intimately involved with the
efforts to repeal our so-called pound seizure law here some years ago,
and there was strong resistance from many segments of the biomedical
research community to that change.

Rowe: I would interject here that people who are interested in finding
out about that information can read the interview with Sandi Larson XE
"Larson, Sandy" of NEAVS \[New England Anti-Vivisection Society XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" \].

Kilroy: There was that kind of resistance in the past.

Rowe: But not in general.

Kilroy: No, I wouldn’t say in general.

Rowe: Okay. Let’s go back to your move into law enforcement. I get the
feeling that you were clearly moving towards trying to stop cruelty to
animals all the time, so it doesn’t surprise me that you decided to move
into law enforcement in 1959. Was that your motivation, that you really
felt strongly that this was something you really wanted to do?

Kilroy: Oh, yes. You know, I just thought this would have been the best
job in the world to have, to have the authority to do something about
animal cruelty, to have the authority to, in effect, prevent animal
cruelty, to rescue animals from cruel situations. To me it was the best
thing in the world.

Rowe: What were the people you worked with like? What were their
motivations? Were they very similar to yours or were there some
careerists?

Kilroy: No. Back then I remember there was a retired Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" police officer, and I think his interest was,
frankly, one of criminal justice \[rather\] than protection. It’s not a
criticism by any means. There was another gentleman, the director of the
department, who was a very humanely sensitive individual. My
recollection is he came from an animal science educational background,
had been with the Society for many years, was also an old school
disciplinarian type of an individual, in many ways was like my father XE
"Kilroy, \[father\]" . I’m trying to remember the people back then.
There was another gentleman who was perhaps at that time — I would have
been like twenty-one then — and that gentleman probably was like
twenty-six or twenty-seven. He had sort of a combination of interest in
animals and criminal justice.

Rowe: I’ve heard from other sources that one of the most difficult
things for police officers when they get called out is dealing with
cruelty to animals. Was there a very strong connection and has there
been with the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" between law enforcement and the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
’s law enforcement? Has there been a lot of cross pollination in terms
of information but also in personnel?

Kilroy: Oh, sure. In fact, it’s not uncommon at all for individuals who
are police officers to express an interest in becoming MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
law enforcement officers. So there’s always been much more interest
coming from the police to our MSPCA law enforcement than from MSPCA law
enforcement to local or state police. I don’t want to suggest that that
never happens, but that is the reality because there’s a much larger
reservoir of personnel out there with all of the police departments we
have than our little law enforcement department constitutes. But we
commonly receive résumés from individuals who are working, most notably,
in local police departments who have worked with one of our officers and
who have had a very small amount of exposure to the kind of work we do
who think this would be a great job to have and who are — in fact
frankly say that they love animals. Therefore, this is what they would
prefer to be doing to what in fact they are doing.

Rowe: More abstract question XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psych2" .
Are you surprised at the type of people that love animals? Have you — in
your long experience of dealing with animal lovers and people concerned
about the welfare of animals, is there a type of person that you can
recognize as an animal lover or has it just been a constant surprise to
you the type of people that do love animals that don’t seem to be the
obvious type of animal lover?

Kilroy: I think there are all kinds of people that love animals,
frankly. You know, I’ve met people that love animals that have no use
for people, and that’s something I’ve never really understood. I’ve met
people who are, like myself, just don’t like cruelty of any kind,
whether it’s directed at animals or people. I’m thinking about some of
the people that I’ve met.

Rowe: The image that I’m trying to conjure up is of the tough cop who’s
seen it all but —

Kilroy: But has a real soft spot.

Rowe: — a real soft spot for animals.

Kilroy: Yes. And I’ve certainly met tough cops who have seen it all and
who are apt to be much more upset by cruelty to an animal than by
cruelty to a person. I suspect that at least in part — not exclusively —
that may be attributable to a couple of things. One is tough cops deal
with a lot of tough people, and I think perhaps to some extent tough
cops may become somewhat — and this is speculation on my part right now
— may become more desensitized to people than they would to animals,
because I don’t think many tough cops meet a lot of tough animals that
give them a lot of difficulty and so on.

I also think that a lot of people, and certainly tough cops included,
probably respond to animals in much the same way as a lot of people
respond to children, that an animal, like a child, is apt to be
perceived, and legitimately so, as largely defenseless, unable to defend
itself against abuse and so on, that an animal can be easily and cruelly
exploited in much the way a child can be exploited as opposed to an
adult in many instances. So I think there’s a tendency on the part of,
whether it’s a tough cop or a person, to want to be protective of
whether it’s a child or an animal because the child or the animal can’t
protect themselves, where the perception that we all have of adults is
that they’re much more capable of protecting themselves. I think there’s
also a tendency on the part of some people anyway, and I’m sure tough
cops included, that even children to some extent can protect themselves
because in many instances they can tell somebody what’s going on or
what’s happened to them.

Rowe: It’s the voicelessness of the animals as well.

Kilroy: Yes. I think there are a lot of things that come into play, and
again, it’s all speculation on my part.

Rowe: Well, it’s speculation borne of many years of experience and
exposure to people such as this. Let’s go back just briefly to the idea
of — you joined the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" as an employee in 1955 and you worked as
a law enforcement officer until 1961 when you went to Morocco XE
"Morocco" to run the Fondouk XE "Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" Veterinary
Hospital there. Were you involved much in the larger issues of the MSPCA
XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" or was it very much you were involved with the day-to-day
running of your particular —

Kilroy: In Morocco XE "Morocco" ?

Rowe: No, no. From 1955 to the time you went to Morocco.

Kilroy: Oh, no. From 1955 until the time I went to Morocco it was pretty
much the day-to-day.

Rowe: Were you aware of what the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" as a whole was trying to
achieve at that time?

Kilroy: Oh, sure.

Rowe: What was the MSPCA XE "law and legislation" \\r "camp1" trying to
achieve XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp1" ?

Kilroy: I felt at that time the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" was particularly concerned
about pound seizure XE "pound seizure" — very concerned about pound
seizure, in fact. I recall at that time from the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" publications
that it was concerned about protecting wild horses and burros. I recall
at that time or around that time anyway that it was concerned about the
use of animals in biomedical research, about the Animal Welfare Act XE
"Animal Welfare Act" and the need for legislation, federal legislation.
I’m trying to remember all those things.

Rowe: So it had tentacles in many areas.

Kilroy: Oh, yes.

Rowe: About the pound seizure XE "pound seizure" , what was its tactics?
What was it trying to achieve? It was pushing for legislation, was that
generally what the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" tried to do, or raise public awareness?

Kilroy: Well, to some extent. Back in those days, charitable
organizations — the lobbying activities, the legislative activities, of
charitable organizations were severely restricted by tax laws. So an
organization like the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , which had charitable status, tax-free
status, could not actively engage and initiate lobbying and legislative
activities without risking that status. But it nevertheless wrote in its
publications and so on, but it didn’t necessarily draft and petition for
the filing of legislation. But if a legislator invited the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
to provide information or to provide testimony, that could be done, but
it couldn’t do it on its own initiative.

Rowe: Did legislators bring forth initiatives in the house legislature
to do these various programs?

Kilroy: Oh, sure. Yes. There were ways, obviously, to get around some of
these kinds of things.

Rowe: But all the — did the bills all fail?

Kilroy: No. In fact, one of my — one of the earliest things that I got
involved with at the state level was as — in fact, when I was still in
law enforcement — was the need to regulate pet shops in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" .

Rowe: That came in the early 70s, I believe.

Kilroy: That’s right. It was passed, if I’m not mistaken, around
November or December of ’71.

Rowe: But in the late 50s, early 60s, there was —

Kilroy: That’s right. I’m jumping way ahead.

Rowe: — there wasn’t much. I’ve been looking at your chronology here,
which will be attached to the interview. It seems from 1956 to 1962
there was new sanctuaries created, there was a new veterinary intensive
care unit that was established. It seems that the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
was focusing in establishing shelters and care units rather than forcing
legislation or trying in some ways to change the law.

Kilroy: But it was involved in some legislative endeavors I know and
even way back then. One that comes to mind now — in those days we had
what was then called the Livestock Conservation Department. There were
efforts being made back at that time to establish — to have passed laws
and regulations governing the handling and slaughter of food animals. I
remember clearly the gentleman who was the director of that department
at that time talking about those efforts and those endeavors. Of course,
ultimately there was federal legislation passed and state legislation
passed. I know that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" played a major role.

Rowe: That would be Humane Slaughter Act XE "Humane Slaughter Act" ,
would it?

Kilroy: Right, that’s right.

Rowe: Okay. And that was in the 1970s, was it?

Kilroy: No, that would have been before the 70s, if I’m not mistaken.

Rowe: That can be followed up on XE "animal shelters" \\r "vet1" . Okay
XE "veterinary medicine" \\r "vet1" . Now, then dramatically and
interestingly you became assistant director of the American Fondouk XE
"Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" , which is a veterinary hospital and
shelter in Fez, Morocco XE "Morocco:Fez" in 1961. This shelter —
hospital and shelter — had been founded by one of the leading lights of
the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" \[Amy Bend Bishop XE "Bishop, Amy Bend" \] in the 1920s
and had been sustained, I believe, for that period of time when — this
was \[when\] MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" members were visiting Morocco XE "Morocco"
and were shocked and appalled at the conditions of the animals there.
Why did you decide to take up this position?

Kilroy: Well, I guess because I was invited to do so, and I was given
the opportunity to visit. I spent about three weeks in Fez XE
"Morocco:Fez" seeing the practices that were present in Morocco XE
"Morocco" , in terms of local animal handling and treatment, as well as
the program that was being conducted by the Fondouk XE "Fondouk
Veterinary Hospital" , both veterinary and inspection and seizing of
animals and so on. I found that sort of fascinating. I also found the
culture to be fascinating, and continue to this day to do so.

I have to say I was appalled by some of the local animal handling and
treatment practices as well as the conditions of some animals, pack
animals principally, primarily mules and donkeys but not exclusively.
And I was very impressed with what the Fondouk XE "Fondouk Veterinary
Hospital" was doing because it was providing services that were
desperately needed to animals and to people who had no money and
providing all of those services free of charge. So I was very impressed
with what it was doing and how much it was doing with what it had in the
way of resources.

Rowe: Was this the first time you had been outside the States?

Kilroy: Yes.

Rowe: And you were a young man to do this. You were twenty-two.

Kilroy: I think I was twenty-one.

Rowe: It was a position of some responsibility.

Kilroy: Yes.

Rowe: Was it a challenge for you in that regard or was it something that
you, because you had been involved with animal care since you were
sixteen it wasn’t so difficult for you to understand how to —

Kilroy: I don’t remember it being particularly — I didn’t find it very
intimidating at all. You have to remember I was also with a more senior
person there who had many years of experience. I sort of had a
baby-sitter in a sense.

Rowe: You were involved there for a year. What were the principal
lessons that you learned from your experience at the Fondouk XE "Fondouk
Veterinary Hospital" and how did you feel they could be applied or if
they could be applied to dealing with animals humanely and the whole
care of animals in the United States?

Kilroy: Well XE "custom/tradition/culture" \\r "cult1" , I’m not sure
any of the lessons I learned there had application really to the
problems and responses or remedies to problems here in the United
States. I suppose the major thing I learned was the extent to which
people, simply through ignorance, could be responsible for terrible
neglect and cruelty to animals. I mean, I saw things there that you
would never expect to see here, in terms of animals that were terribly
overworked, animals that were literally covered with abscesses and open
sores. I saw animals treated, in the belief that it was going to help
the animal, in ways that were horribly cruel. I’m thinking of —

Rowe: Burning the skin.

Kilroy: Branding of the skin and so on. I remember coming upon an animal
one time — I think I counted twenty-eight raw oozing burns on that
animal. It was a mule and it was down on the roadside. It had colic and
it was all bloated from the colic. The owner had, in the belief that
branding and burning would help, subjected the animal to twenty-eight
long terrible individual burns on its sides.

Rowe: This was folk medicine that they were practicing essentially?

Kilroy: Right. I saw donkeys that had their ears cut off by women who
believed that if they cut the ears off and ground the ears up into a
meal their husband was going to eat, who they believed to have been
unfaithful, that it would rectify that. I saw donkeys who had had the
ends of their tongues cut off for the same kinds of reasons.

Rowe: Now XE "veterinary medicine" \\r "vet2" , when you went back in
1978 to see the — at the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the
Fondouk XE "Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" , had attitudes changed in
terms of sort of folk understanding of animals and the over-exploitation
of pack animals XE "animal shelters" \\r "vet2" ?

Kilroy: I, in fact, was enormously impressed by the changes that I had
seen, and really the major change being that when I had been there in
the early 60s — ’61, ’62 — ninety percent, if not more than ninety
percent, of the animals that we were treating — we always had a full
house — were animals that we were seizing. We would go out on
inspections on a daily basis and we would essentially seize animals from
owners who were working them because they were so much in need of
medical attention.

Rowe: Along with, presumably, a law enforcement officer from —

Kilroy: No.

Rowe: No?

Kilroy: It was just unnecessary. The Fondouk XE "Fondouk Veterinary
Hospital" was so well known and the Fondouk personnel, one in
particular, were so well known and was in effect given, and that was
recognized, absolute authority and compliance. I mean, I wish we had
that here in many instances XE "managing an organization" \\r "org1" .

Rowe: There’s an interesting lesson that you learned there, the power of
a social group to say, “This organization has license to do that,”
something that doesn’t happen here. There’s one lesson.

Kilroy: You almost never encountered strong resistance or even moderate
resistance. There was just an acceptance of his authority to take them.
He’d give them a receipt for the animal, and they would know that if the
animal could be rehabilitated they would eventually wind up recovering
the animal. But we would go out every day and we would come back with a
truckload of animals. Sometimes \[we would\] go out several times a day
and come back with several truckloads of animals. So most of the
patients of the Fondouk XE "Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" were animals
that had been seized.

I remember when I returned in the 70s, late 70s, as I approached the
Fondouk XE "Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" — as we drove up to the Fondouk
— it was in the morning — I was simply overwhelmed by the number of
animals that were waiting outside of its entrance, none of which had
been seized, with their owners waiting to be admitted to the Fondouk XE
"Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" . They had come in voluntarily on their
own initiative in response to their own recognition that their animal
needed some kind of medical attention. I think it was seventy-something
animals out there that first morning waiting to be admitted, many of
whom had been out there for several hours. I was enormously impressed by
that, what an impact the Fondouk XE "Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" had
had on attitudes without a formal educational program.

Rowe: So not only had they been sanctioned by society to seize animals —
that was happening in 1960 — but they built up trust.

Kilroy: Yes.

Rowe: And they built up trust over a long period of time, over fifty
years, because they had recognized the utility of these animals to their
owners and that consequently had provided people with no reason to fear
them as an organization.

Kilroy: Right. The other thing I remember during that time and learned,
that there were certain owners who were coming in on a very regular
basis with their animals when there was literally nothing wrong with
those animals, but feeling that by coming in on a regular basis they
were safeguarding their animals. And they were expecting medication to
be administered. In fact, it had become the practice of the Fondouk XE
"Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" to administer placebos for these animals
so the owner wouldn’t leave disappointed or leave disinclined to return
when there was a need. That impressed me as well, in fact. I remember
one of the things that impressed me was an old gentleman that walked for
twelve or fourteen miles with a little dog in a satchel and was coming
on a regular basis with his little dog in this satchel for medical
attention. I wondered to myself, “I wonder how many people that I deal
with would walk fourteen miles.” I think it might have even been
happening on a daily basis.

Rowe: Now, this Fondouk XE "Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" , this animal
shelter — was this duplicated in other countries around the Arab world
or was this the only one that was being actively supported by the MSPCA
XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" ?

Kilroy: This was the only — to the best of my knowledge, this would have
been the only one essentially being administered by and through the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" in the Arab world. There are some other similar operations that
were in the Arab world that were being administered by, as I recall, the
Royal XE "Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" SPCA —
the North African section of the Royal SPCA. I know that, in fact, to be
the case. I believe they had one in southern Morocco XE "Morocco" . I
can’t remember exactly where now.

Rowe: I was struck reading the chronology here that in the early 1960s,
about the time that you actually were at the Fondouk XE "Fondouk
Veterinary Hospital" , the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , which had joined up with the
International Society for the Protection of Animals XE "International
Society for the Protection of Animals (ISPA)" , the ISPA, in 1956 —
there seemed to be much more international work that began to take
place. In 1962 the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and the ISPA worked to improve the slaughter
methods in Latin America. In ’64 Operation Gwamba XE "Operation Gwamba"
in Surinam XE "Surinam" helped save over 9,000 animals from the flooding
caused by a hydroelectric dam. These two particular successes — were
they part of a deliberate attempt by the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" to internationalize
its animal protection policy?

Kilroy: In my judgment, definitely. There’s no question but that the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" wanted to extend its influence and impact with the Royal XE
"Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" SPCA by
founding the International Society XE "International Society for the
Protection of Animals (ISPA)" , jointly founding the International
Society, which in fact it did. I remember very clearly some of the
meetings that were taking place, not that I had a role in those
meetings.

In fact, the role I had at that time was as a law enforcement officer —
a relatively new law enforcement officer who served as a chauffeur.
There were organizational meetings taking place for a period of a couple
of weeks here. There were representatives from the Royal XE "Royal
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" SPCA and perhaps other
places as well. People were being shuttled basically between hotels and
meeting places. I can remember shuttling such people, as a matter of
fact.

Rowe: In your position you then became — as you indicated, you moved
back to law enforcement in 1963 where you remained for ten years until
1973 as the assistant director of law enforcement for the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
. Apart from being a chauffeur, were you privy to the kinds of ideas
that were being rooted about, why an international policy was the best
thing for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" — as opposed to maybe the ASPCA XE "American
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA)" , which one
would normally think to be the sort of national representative — why the
Massachusetts society would get involved in moving into an international
arena, or is that something that you don’t particularly know about?

Kilroy: Yes, I don’t remember. I may have, but if I did know I can’t
recall. It doesn’t surprise me any because the founder of the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
was something of an internationalist, George Thorndike Angell XE
"Angell, George Thorndike" . Of course, the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" historically
has operated the American Humane Education Society XE "American Humane
Education Society" , which was founded some twenty-odd years later. But
I honestly don’t remember.

Rowe: I’m interested in what happened during the 1960s. Like many towns
across America, Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" was a scene of great
turbulence, especially in the latter 60s, especially around busing and
civil rights — that was perhaps even into the 70s as well — and the
turbulence in society. Did this in any way affect what was happening in
terms of humane law enforcement? Was there a social change that, as you
indicated before, made the situation even worse with the increasing
level of violence desensitizing judges to the issue? Were there changes
taking place that affected your work in the 1960s?

Kilroy: I can’t recall any changes in the 60s that adversely impacted
the work back then XE "media" \\r "media2" . If I have any recollection
of change at that time, it would be a more positive one and it would be
the product more than anything else of increased media interest.

Rowe: Okay.

Kilroy: I’m convinced that television in particular has had a major
impact on increasing the level of public awareness and public
sensitivity. They love animal stories.

Rowe: When did that first kick in and when did the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
start contacting television to get people aware of animal issues?

Kilroy: I would say probably in the 60s. In fact, my recollection is our
first public relations department was established probably in the 60s.
That’s my best recollection.

Rowe: In the early 60s or have you some idea of when?

Kilroy: I could find out certainly, but I can’t immediately remember. I
would guess it was in the early 60s. I’m trying to — I remember the
people, who they were and so on, at that time.

Rowe: Was there a sense that this was a medium with which animal
protection had to become savvy, had to become aware of using it to
promote animal welfare, or was it just, oh, here’s another medium to get
the message out?

Kilroy: I think there was a recognition that it was a great way to get
your message out. But I also think as a practical matter there was a
recognition that this was a great way to increase one’s profile, to
generate increased membership, funding for program support and so on. I
have no doubt about that.

Rowe: So the material that you had on television in those times was not
just try and catch the perpetrators of this terrible deed and using the
news through that medium, but you also did advertising on the television
or you had — how did you use the television?

Kilroy: No, most of the television, as I recall — and most of our
involvement with television — and, in fact, the print media — was the
result of either animal abuse and cruelty cases or animal rescue
situations, where an animal was in distress and somebody called all of
the television stations or all of the newspapers to alert them to the
fact that there was an attempted rescue in progress. I’m trying to think
of some of the things. I’ve got a scrapbook that’s just packed, but
obviously not a television scrapbook.

In fact, I can remember at one point in time when there was some small
reward offered to members of staff by our public relations department
that if you became aware of a newsworthy issue and you telephoned public
relations and let them know rather immediately and in a timely fashion,
that they would pay some small amount of money because they wanted to
know what was potentially newsworthy.

Rowe: \[I am\] reminded of an issue. When you went to the Fondouk XE
"Fondouk Veterinary Hospital" for a year, what happened to all your
animals? Did you take them with you — your companion animals?

Kilroy: We had a two-year-old, just under two years old son. I don’t
think at that time we had an animal. I lived in a home that was owned by
mother XE "Kilroy, \[mother\]" and father XE "Kilroy, \[father\]" .

Rowe: Was your wife XE "Kilroy, \[wife\]" interested in animals as well?
Was she involved with the animal welfare movement?

Kilroy: No, not at all. I mean, I’m not saying she has no interest in
animals, but that was not a major interest of hers by any means. She’s
always been very, very tolerant. I can remember at one point in time,
again going back to when I used to bring animals home, that she was
having some kind of a shower. I don’t remember whether it was a wedding
shower for somebody else or somebody was giving her a shower or what.
But anyway, we lived in a very small apartment — actually in an attic
three-room apartment — and very low bathroom with a pitched roof
\[that\] came down over the tub. The light or something had burned out
in the bathroom and at the most inopportune time. There was no
replacement bulb.

In the meantime all of her women friends arrived. One of them needed to
use the bathroom, so we left the door ajar just to allow enough light to
get in there. There was nobody else there except all the women. While
she was in there, there was a scream because there was a snapping turtle
in there that she had forgot to mention with all of the excitement of
people coming in rather simultaneously. How did I get on that?

Rowe: I was talking about your wife XE "Kilroy, \[wife\]" and how she
was —

Kilroy: So she never minded — at all — my interest in animals or my
inclination to bring animals home, and she helped.

Rowe: You brought a bald eagle at one point home XE "birds:bald eagles"
\\r "bird3" . Was that when you were living with your wife XE "Kilroy,
\[wife\]" ?

Kilroy: Oh, yes XE "animal rescues" \\r "bird3" .

Rowe: How did you get a hold of a bald eagle? \[Laughter\].

Kilroy: As a law enforcement officer, I had become friendly with the
senior enforcement agent for the U.S. Department of the Interior XE
"U.S. Department of the Interior" for New England. As it turned out, he
wound up — we wound up living in towns adjacent to one another. We had
become friends, good friends, and went to each other’s homes — visited
each other regularly and went to each other’s Christmas parties and so
on.

He called me about two o’clock one morning to say he had received a call
that there was an eagle sitting on a fence — it was pouring buckets rain
— in a town quite a distance away, actually in Westport XE
"Massachusetts:Westport" , Mass., which would have been about forty
miles from where I lived, thirty-five to forty miles at least on a
remote country road. Would I be willing to go with him to see if in fact
this eagle was there and help him?

So the two of us at two o’clock that morning — and I had a station wagon
and I had some equipment that he didn’t have, a cage and so on — went to
Westport XE "Massachusetts:Westport" and, sure enough, just as had been
reported to him, as we drove down this dirt road using a spotlight
because there was a post-and-rail fence like a farm fence, and there it
was, this poor bald eagle. It was a young bald eagle exhibiting immature
plumage. It didn’t have the white head, but it was fully grown. It was
all hunched over on a split rail fence saturated. We stopped and got out
with nets and it immediately jumped into deep grass but couldn’t fly. We
netted it and brought it in. I, in fact, drove it in from Westport XE
"Massachusetts:Westport" . After dropping Jim at his car, I kept on
going right into Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" with the eagle and
delivered it to Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" for medical
attention.

Rowe: How had it come to this — it’s not native to this area.

Kilroy: Oh, yes, although they were a lot less common then than they are
today. There’s been some real effort to restore the population. So this
was very unusual but not unheard of. Anyway, I brought it in. There was
a veterinarian at that time here — she has since retired — who was an
avian expert who has written a number of books on avian medicine XE
"veterinary medicine" . She determined that it was almost certainly
suffering from pesticide poisoning XE "poisoning of animals" . Plus,
young bald eagles aren’t necessarily very effective hunters and
predators. They much more often feed on carrion, often dead fish. It
spent two or three weeks here.

Rowe: When was this? When did you rescue the eagle?

Kilroy: It would have been in, as I recall, in the 60s.

Rowe: In the 60s. Let me just ask you this question: Were you, during
the 60s, from ’63 to ’73, had you much call with wildlife rescue that
you were involved, because you always had an interest in wildlife. Were
you aware if the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" \[was\] involved with much wildlife rescue?

Kilroy: Oh, yes. We did a lot of wildlife rescue in those days, in fact.
I had been — I had myself been involved in a lot of wildlife rescue. And
when I say wildlife rescue, whether it’s a skunk in a window well or a
skunk in a recessed garbage container or — I’m trying to think of some
of the situations — squirrels in chimneys — I mean, some of the very
common kinds of things.

Rowe: What about exotic animals XE "exotic animals" \\r "exotic1" ,
people keeping any inappropriate exotic animals — was there a lot of
that then XE "law and legislation" \\r "exotic1" ?

Kilroy: Yes. There was a lot of that then.

Rowe: Has that become less prevalent over the years as people — as
ordinances have been passed?

Kilroy: Yes. There’s probably less of it today than there had been. And
certainly there are a lot of species that could have been acquired back
then that would not be available today because of laws that have been
changed.

In fact XE "pet shops" , another thing that I was intimately involved
with as a lobbyist for the Society was the pursuit of changes to laws of
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" to severely restrict the importation,
possession, sale, and so on of a lot of exotic species of animals,
because when I was a law enforcement officer in the field, I just saw
what I considered to be terrible situations in pet shops where they were
offering exotic animals as pets. I mean, I had seen animals that were
being offered for sale that the pet shop that was offering it didn’t
know what it was XE "snakes" \\r "snake1" . I had seen poisonous snakes
being offered without the pet shop operator realizing what they were
offering to be sold or to sell was a poisonous snake. I had seen animals
that were in pet shops that essentially lived an arboreal life high in
trees that would not come down from a perch, an elevated perch, to get
food because they felt so insecure in a cage where the food was placed
on the floor. The operator of the pet shop didn’t realize that that was
the case. I mean, I saw a lot of things in pet shops XE "pet shops" that
troubled me greatly.

Rowe: We’ll talk about that in the next interview when you worked to
regulate pet shops. Now, your longtime interest in herpetology, the
study of snakes. How had you been, as it were, feeding that interest, I
mean, this parallel interest? What had you been studying? Had you wanted
to pursue further studies in herpetology?

Kilroy: Yes. I had all my life just about — though it’s certainly
subsided in recent years. But for most of my life I had a very strong
interest in herpetology. I also, in fact, came to feel and feel quite
strongly that if you could get people to respect and be considerate of,
humane to snakes, then you had a real good chance that one of the
byproducts of that would be humaneness in general to everything else,
that if people could find it in their hearts to be kind to and concerned
about snakes, then it would be very easy and rather logical for them to
be kind and concerned about animals that they would normally find more
appealing and that they identified with more.

In fact, I was one of a number of people who came together to form what
was then called the Massachusetts Herpetological Society XE
"Massachusetts Herpetological Society" \\t "See New England
Herpetological Society" , which continues to exist today as the New
England Herpetological Society XE "New England Herpetological Society" .
So I was very much — through that I became involved with a great many
people who shared an interest in, if not snakes, then in other types of
reptiles and amphibians. And I stayed actively involved in that for
quite a long time, although I haven’t been now, also for quite a long
time. There was a period of time even when I was giving lectures
independent of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" to school groups and others concerning
snakes — primarily snakes but also reptiles in general.

Rowe: Were you thought of as strange within the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" for your
interest?

Kilroy: Oh, sure. I’m still thought of to some extent today by some
anyway probably as somewhat strange.

Rowe: Because of your interest in snakes.

Kilroy: Because of my interest in snakes. You know, I have to say that
I’ve met people in the humane movement whose reactions to snakes is so
typical of some of the other people who are not in the humane movement,
which is a reaction of aversion and not necessarily a lot of feeling for
or concern about snakes. Again, we would be getting into another area
concerning pet shops XE "pet shops" . Here in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" , the first time we had snakes or reptiles recognized as
deserving of protection was with the pet shop regulations and law.

Rowe: Okay. We’ll deal with some of the issues that you’ve been involved
with in the next tape. I’m going to end it here.

\[End of Session\].

Walter Kilroy

Session \#2

April 28, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts

Martin Rowe, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Rowe: Walter, basically in our first interview we got up to the end of
the 60s and the developments that have taken place within your role
within the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" \[Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals\]. Now I’d like to talk a bit about some of the
issues that you were involved with, that you had written on, and kind of
look at them over the last thirty years and how you’ve been involved
with them.

The issue of trapping and banning the steel jaw leg-hold trap in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" . I’d like you to talk about the
process whereby legislation was passed and the kinds of problems that
Bob Cummings XE "Cummings, Bob" had mentioned in the attempts by the
trappers to continually water down the legislation and your involvement
particularly in this effort XE "trapping" \\r "trap1" .

Kilroy: Do you mean my very early involvement XE "law and legislation"
\\r "trap1" ?

Rowe: Over this particular issue and by that then the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
’s involvement as well XE "wildlife" \\r "trap1" .

Kilroy: I had my most significant introduction to leg-hold trapping and
the cruelties associated with it back in the early 70s when I was in
fact at that time the assistant director of law enforcement. At that
time \[I\] was asked by the president of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , then David
Claflin XE "Claflin, David" , to attend the first international
conference on humane trapping. It was held in Toronto XE
"Canada:Toronto" , Canada, sponsored by the Canadian Association for
Humane Trapping XE "Canadian Association for Humane Trapping" . That was
a conference of about four or five days duration. There were people from
all over the world that attended the conference, though principally from
North America, including trapping interests and trappers and trap
manufacturers and humane interests and government officials and so on.

The thing that made the greatest impact on me while I was at that
conference was a film that had been produced by the Canadian Association
for Humane Trapping XE "Canadian Association for Humane Trapping" , the
title of which was “They Take So Long To Die XE "They Take So Long To
Die \[film\]" .” It was a color film of about thirty minutes duration,
and it depicted a variety of wild animals that had been captured, caught
in different kinds of traps, most notably, however, leg-hold traps —
also snares. Frankly, it was the first time I had —

Rowe: When you say leg-hold traps, you mean all types of leg-hold traps.

Kilroy: Yes. A variety of types of leg-hold traps or at least a variety
of sizes. I don’t recall that there were any leg-hold traps with teeth
on them or anything of that nature. Frankly, I was appalled by the
degree of animal suffering that was presented in that particular film. I
was very upset by it. Leg-hold trapping was legal and had long been
legal in the state of Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" . While we
sometimes saw the results of the use of those traps in the form of
animals with broken legs and so on, I had never actually observed an
animal in a trap that was attached to a stake struggling and struggling
for extended periods of time and gnawing at the trap and so on. \[I\]
saw that really for the first time in color in this film. I came back
from there determined to try to do something about leg-hold trapping in
Massachusetts.

Rowe: Had anybody within the trapping community also seen the film? Was
this a general film that was shown to everybody or was it members of the
humane organizations who were seeing this film?

Kilroy: Oh, no. There were also representatives of trapping interests,
including trappers, that attended this conference.

Rowe: But they watched the film?

Kilroy: Oh, sure. They watched the film.

Rowe: What did they say about it?

Kilroy: Some of them had little to say about it. Others of them
contended that it was staged and it was an exaggeration and a distortion
of reality. In fact, this was not a staged situation. That was very
obvious and apparent. Certainly the defense of trapping that was being
made and the criticism of the film was falling on, in my case, deaf
ears. I was convinced of the absolute legitimacy, the reality of what
was happening and what was being depicted in this film. I really came
back wanting to do something about trapping in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" .

When I did return, I went again to the president of MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
who had sent me to the conference. At that time we were prohibited —
either by law or by regulation, I’m not sure which — from engaging in
lobbying practices. So anyway, the suggestion that came out of a
meeting, I think originally between probably Bob Cummings XE "Cummings,
Bob" and David Claflin XE "Claflin, David" , was that I seek to create
an ad hoc committee, the purpose of which would be to draft and petition
for the filing of legislation that would restrict or abolish cruel
trapping, most notably again leg-hold trapping.

Rowe: How is this distinctive from a lobbying position, this committee
to —

Kilroy: This was to be independent of the MSPCA. This was basically to
become a citizens committee on which I served. In fact, there was a
young man who had an already established interest in doing something
about cruel trapping. His name was John McGrail XE "McGrail, John" . I
remember that well. I met with John. I met with another gentleman named
Peter Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Peter" who was chairman of an
organization called the Wildlife Survival Project XE "Wildlife Survival
Project" that was interested in wildlife conservation. I believe we also
had an attorney whose name was Neil Moynihan XE "Moynihan, Neil" who was
a member of the firm of then Peabody, Brown XE "Peabody, Brown" . We
came together on this committee.

Historically the most — the strongest opposition to any kind of reforms
in terms of trapping in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , the most
influential opposition to bills of this nature that had been previously
filed, was the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife XE "Division of
Fisheries and Wildlife (Massachusetts)" , the Massachusetts Division of
Fisheries and Wildlife. A decision was made by this committee — of which
I was at that point in time a member, and John McGrail XE "McGrail,
John" , incidentally, served as chairman — to go to the then director of
the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife XE "Division of Fisheries and
Wildlife (Massachusetts)" , a gentleman by the name of Jim Sheppard XE
"Sheppard, Jim" . He subsequently assumed the executive director’s
position of Ducks Unlimited XE "Ducks Unlimited" some years later.

Rowe: Which is a pro-hunting organization.

Kilroy: Pretty much, sure. Absolutely, in fact. In any event, a decision
was made to seek a meeting with Jim Sheppard XE "Sheppard, Jim" to see
if in fact we were to file legislation or have legislation filed, that
although we didn’t expect that he would support it or his agency would
support it, would they at least remain neutral on it and not to oppose
it. In fact, such a meeting took place and Sheppard XE "Sheppard, Jim"
would not agree to that.

Rowe: How had you found out that there was opposition from the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service?

Kilroy: Not U.S. This is the state.

Rowe: I mean Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" .

Kilroy: The Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" Division.

Rowe: How they heard about your committee?

Kilroy: I don’t think they had at that stage heard about our committee,
but certainly there had been bills filed in previous years by
legislators on behalf of citizens. Consistently the Division of
Fisheries and Wildlife XE "Division of Fisheries and Wildlife
(Massachusetts)" at public hearings opposed passage of those bills, so
we knew their opposition to such bills was strong and had been
historically so since the beginning of time, I believe.

In any event, Sheppard XE "Sheppard, Jim" would not agree to having his
agents remain neutral. He made a counteroffer, however, which somewhat
surprised us, which was to create a larger committee composed of
representatives of humane interests and the trapping interests within
the state of Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , as well as the academic
community, whose purpose it would be initially to do informational
research by which to try to either satisfy humane interests that
trapping was not as cruel as we believed it to be or to establish that
indeed it was that cruel and in fact changes had to made or should be
made anyway. That committee was in fact formed. That committee was
chaired by —

Rowe: So you accepted that counterproposal.

Kilroy: The committee accepted that — Mr. Sheppard XE "Sheppard, Jim" ’s
proposal or counterproposal.

Rowe: Did you feel there was no other option if you wanted to get some
legislation passed?

Kilroy: Yes, we did. We really felt that unless we could somehow
overcome the opposition and the influence of the Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" Division of Fisheries and Wildlife XE "Division of
Fisheries and Wildlife (Massachusetts)" , the prospect at that time of
getting legislation passed was pretty remote, about non-existent, in
fact.

Rowe: Because of the hold that the hunting — well, the trapping lobby
particularly — had over the legislative —

Kilroy: But even greater than that was the influence that the state
agency, the Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" Division of Fisheries and
Wildlife XE "Division of Fisheries and Wildlife (Massachusetts)" , had
with the legislature and had with the Committee on Natural Resources and
Agriculture XE "Committee on Natural Resources and Agriculture
(Massachusetts)" , which would hear this bill and report it out
favorably, unfavorably, or whatever. So we felt that there was little —
we were also pretty confident that the informational research that we
might do would help make the case for us, as a matter of fact. In any
event, that proposal from Sheppard XE "Sheppard, Jim" was accepted. It
was called the Massachusetts Committee for Humane Trapping XE
"Massachusetts Committee for Humane Trapping" .

Rowe: When you say we would do the research —

Kilroy: The committee would, the larger committee.

Rowe: The larger committee would do the research. You had confidence
that the academics that would be chosen would be neutral, would be only
concerned about finding the absolute facts of the case?

Kilroy: I think that would depend upon who was in fact selected to serve
on the committee, to some extent anyway.

Rowe: And was that the case?

Kilroy: Yes. At least at the outset — and I’m trying to remember all of
the members of that committee. But the principal academic representative
was a person that was perceived to have real integrity and objectivity
and would let the facts dictate the outcome. In any event, over a period
of some number of months, informational research was done. There wasn’t
as much information out there as we had hoped and expected. As a result
of which, a decision was then made —

Rowe: Information in general or information in favor of your cause?

Kilroy: Well, there was information in favor of our cause, but it wasn’t
necessarily scientifically supported. There was information in support
of trapping interests, their position on trapping, the leg-hold trapping
and so on, but also not necessarily scientifically supported. The only
real research that had been done — significant amount of research that
had been done up to that point in time had been done, in fact, in Canada
XE "Canada" . I honestly cannot immediately remember what that research
revealed. There were reports that came out of the Canadian research that
was done by yet another committee in Canada called the
Federal-Provincial Committee for the Study of Trapping XE
"Federal-Provincial Committee for the Study of Trapping (Canada)" , I
believe. But we did get their reports. I certainly interpreted some of
their findings as supportive of the validity of our allegations that
these types of traps were indeed very, very cruel in many, many
instances if not in almost all such instances. I sort of lost my place
here for a moment.

Rowe: The findings, the material, wasn’t there for a finding of facts.

Kilroy: That’s right. Then a decision was made — and this was a
difficult decision to make for a humane organization to be involved with
and to be a party to and so on. But a decision was made that a —

Rowe: Who made the decision?

Kilroy: The committee.

Rowe: As a whole?

Kilroy: Yes. \[It\] made a decision to attempt to do its own field
research, to have the field research conducted, which really meant
trying to set leg-hold traps under circumstances which would allow
filming and photography, that all of the animals trapped would be
humanely destroyed. Their injuries would be classified, that
post-mortems would be done, leg injuries would be — the severity and so
on or the presence and/or severity of leg injuries, oral injuries,
injuries to teeth and so on — would be classified. And ultimately
hopefully, upon concluding this field research project, there would be
evidence of the kind that — at least I expected such a field research
project would produce — that would show indisputably that the use of
these traps in the majority of cases was very, very cruel and injurious
to the animals that were caught in them.

In the meantime, incidentally, I obtained a copy of the film, “They Take
So Long To Die XE "They Take So Long To Die \[film\]" .” I don’t
remember if it was at the same time or actually maybe even before this
XE "media" . As I recall anyway, I got a public station — I can’t recall
whether it was Channel 2 or 44 — to air that film, to present that film.
I also showed it to one or two local groups as well XE "public
relations/outreach" .

Rowe: Animal protection groups.

Kilroy: Yes. Volunteer groups actually. In fact, I can remember speaking
to a group of volunteers one night as well. In any event, that film
generated far more interest, far more public interest, and really a much
greater public outcry than I expected that it might. It was seen by far
more people than I realized that it would. So around the same time that
the field research project was being designed and funding for its
implementation was being sought, independent of that, other people who
had been exposed to this film and were outraged by what they had seen,
decided to pursue legislation to prohibit the use of leg-hold traps XE
"public relations/outreach" .

XE "media"

Rowe: What did the committee think about this, because clearly the
Massachusetts Fish and Wildlife Services and the hunters or the trappers
had in some ways wanted to be part of a larger committee to forestall
legislation on this particular issue until there had been proper
research done on it. And here you were, instrumental in some ways in
stimulating interest to produce another bill. What did they say about
it?

Kilroy: The committee did not believe — and this was based on legal
advice — that the bill that had been filed would in fact prevent the
pursuit of the field research, that existing laws that served to
authorize the director of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife XE
"Division of Fisheries and Wildlife (Massachusetts)" to conduct or have
conducted scientific research would be the determining law. So that even
if in fact the legislation that was ultimately pending to abolish the
use of leg-hold traps and abolish the possession of and the importation
of and the sale of them, but regulate the use of them, that even if that
in fact were to pass that it would not compromise or interfere with or
impede the pursuit of the field study that had been designed.

Rowe: It wouldn’t do that but it would in some ways do an end run around
that.

Kilroy: In fact, it did. Ultimately it did. Because that bill,
incidentally, which became law, restricted the use of leg-hold traps to
in or under buildings on land owned or leased by the person setting the
trap or underwater, set underwater, in a way and manner which ensured
that the animal caught would drown within a minimum length of time.

Rowe: The animal being a beaver presumably.

Kilroy: Well, beaver, muskrat XE "muskrats" . Muskrat trapping was a
major pursuit in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" certainly. So it
effectively — for the most part — effectively restricted or prohibited
the trapping of such animals as fox and raccoons and non-aquatic species
anyway — squirrels and so on. In fact, that bill became law. The
legislature in fact passed that bill.

Throughout this entire period this whole topic of trapping and leg-hold
trapping and so on received an enormous amount of media XE "media"
attention, an unprecedented degree of public exposure XE "public
relations/outreach" .

Rowe: Within Massachusetts.

Kilroy: Within Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" .

Rowe: How did that happen? Who were the coalitions that were involved
with this and what was your involvement, if any at all, with the
movement to get this bill passed?

Kilroy: As a member of this committee —

Rowe: You couldn’t do anything.

Kilroy: No. In fact, you have to remember that in those days the society
wasn’t allowed to engage in lobbying activities.

Rowe: But in some way you must have felt instrumental in beginning the
push.

Kilroy: Oh, I think I — and in fact not certainly only I — had a
significant role in initiating what ultimately developed into a fairly
successful campaign to severely restrict leg-hold trapping. I would not
take credit for the actual achievement or a significant part of that
credit because others, in fact, did that.

Rowe: When was the bill passed?

Kilroy: My recollection is back in the 70s, perhaps in ’73, ’74,
somewhere around that time.

Rowe: You wrote in an article on trapping — and all of these articles
will be appended to your interview — that the legislators were very
reluctant to enact legislation on this issue and kept the bill in
committee for several months. Why were they reluctant? What were the
pressures being applied to them?

Kilroy: Again, I have no doubt that the Division of Fisheries and
Wildlife XE "Division of Fisheries and Wildlife (Massachusetts)" was
expressing its opposition to it. Also, the Division of Fisheries and
Wildlife XE "Division of Fisheries and Wildlife (Massachusetts)" I’m
sure — as were others — seizing upon the presence of this committee, the
study committee, the committee of which I was a member, as justification
for not acting on the legislation. “Let’s wait for the study and the
results of the study when we’ll in fact know more than we know now, when
the doubts and so on one way or the other will have been substantially
reduced or eliminated.” So that was certainly one of the factors.

The other factor was —

Rowe: Was it a genuine factor or was it an excuse?

Kilroy: It was an excuse. The other factor, however, was — which had
always been the case — is the trappers were very effective in generating
fear on the part of hunters, most notably bow hunting in particular but
also gun hunters, that if the animal protectionists were successful in
their attack on trapping, then they would, once having succeeded, then
they would turn their attention to hunting. And hunters were — and in
fact even today — are a much larger constituency. So I think there was
genuine fear on the part of legislators and sporting interests that a
dominoes process might develop.

Rowe: \[unclear\] animal protectionists.

Kilroy: Oh, sure, and in fact many instances probably more vocal and so
on. Also, a lot of legislators hunt. So I think there was — the trappers
succeeded in creating some paranoia in the minds of legislators that if
in fact they enacted anti-trapping legislation they would not only
alienate trappers but they would alienate hunters as well. There were
far more hunters that voted than trappers that voted. That’s speculation
on my part, but I think it’s very logical, and certainly at the time I
recall that having been discussed and acknowledged.

Rowe: And yet the bill was passed XE "public relations/outreach" \\r
"media9" , and you have discussed this issue generally in your writing
of how publicity is very important XE "media" \\r "media9" . You said
there was a lot of publicity generally in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" about that at the time.

Kilroy: Without that publicity it never, ever would have passed. There
is no doubt.

Rowe: How did that — just as an observer but an interested observer —
how did that publicity grow, manifest itself, change, become convincing
enough for the legislature to listen to the people rather than a very
powerful lobby?

Kilroy: I think first of all television — that film XE "They Take So
Long To Die \[film\]" .

Rowe: Showing the film.

Kilroy: Right. That film was sort of the launching of media interest.
That stimulated greater media interest. There were letters to the
editors of newspapers constantly being sent. The more publicity that was
generated, the more that publicity generated. It really fed upon itself
in I think a very dramatic way. You know, the hearing at the state house
on the legislative proposals that related to trapping at that time were
mobbed with people. They were in and of themselves media events. The
media was present for those hearings. They had to move one of the
hearings, I recall, from the room that was normally used by the
Committee on Natural Resources and Agriculture XE "Committee on Natural
Resources and Agriculture (Massachusetts)" to Gardner Auditorium because
there were so many people that they couldn’t fit into the room that they
customarily had hearings on bills of this nature held in. Then there
were newspapers ultimately that adopted editorial positions. The Boston
Globe XE "Boston Globe" , for example, as I recall, at that time may
have — and I hope I’m correct in this — but I think may have supported
the legislation as well. It’s interesting because more recently, in more
recent years, in response to Question One XE "Question One
\[anti-trapping initiative\]" , the Boston Globe XE "Boston Globe"
editorial opposed it.

Rowe: Question One being?

Kilroy: Question One XE "Question One \[anti-trapping initiative\]"
being the law that was passed not that long ago that really — as a
result of an initiative petition and so on — really and truly restricts
much more severely the use of body-gripping traps — leg-hold, conibears
and so on. The Boston Globe XE "Boston Globe" , in response to that
legislative proposal, opposed that legislation. But back in the 70s, my
recollection is the Globe was much more supportive of the restrictions
on leg-hold traps.

Rowe: Consequent to that statement you’ve made, you’re still having this
issue over trapping in this legislative endeavor at the moment. You’re
receiving heat from trappers. You had a letter in the Trapper and
Predator Caller XE "Trapper and Predator Caller" complaining about that.
How has the issue evolved? I’m interested in that the Boston Globe XE
"Boston Globe" should oppose this when you would hope that there would
be greater awareness of the cruelty over twenty years, that somehow the
humane movement would have grown and the hunting and trapping movement
would have become less strong and powerful. How has the issue of
trapping for you changed over that period of time in terms of the need
to stop it or to limit it severely?

Kilroy: I think trapping in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" has been
severely limited at this point in time, and certainly much more so than
in the 70s when the law that we just talked about had been passed. That
was a law that was easily violated, and I’m sure there are still
violations today. But that was a law that was very easily violated. I
mean, who is going to enforce whether or not a trap was placed in water
in a way and manner which ensured that the animal drowned within a
minimum length of time? It was largely unenforceable.

Today, as a result of the passage of Question One XE "Question One
\[anti-trapping initiative\]" legislation, there are restrictions on
possession, importation, possession, sale, and obviously use. There is
no more in water in a way and manner which ensures that an animal drown
within a minimum length of time. No more in or under a building and so
on. So the restrictions are much, much more severe. The controls are
much, much greater.

I honestly can’t answer you as to how effectively the law is being
enforced. These kinds of laws in general require almost voluntary
compliance in most instances because you can’t have somebody following
trappers all over the woods and so on to see what they’re doing.

Rowe: It’s more the social pressures, the situation that there is in the
state, the kinds of organizing capabilities that have been emerging or
have evolved over the last twenty years from both sides, and who’s more
effective at getting legislation passed these days.

Kilroy: That’s right.

Rowe: We can come back to that issue XE "spaying and neutering" \\r
"spay1" . I’d like to talk about spay/neuter XE "overpopulation of
animals" \\r "spay1" , which is clearly an issue that you have to deal
with everyday in the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , or the lack of it and the results of
it. In 1977 you wrote about the problems of overpopulation of cats and
dogs and all the litany of issues that come about. There was a program
in 1986 established by the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" to somehow deal with it and
again in 1996 these initiatives to try to educate people about spay and
neutering. What in your experience have been the consistent themes of
the various programs and the various issues that have come up for you as
you have worked within the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" about spaying and neutering —
ignorance or a resistant demographic to spaying and neutering. Any
particular themes that have come through for you?

Kilroy: Again, most of my involvement with the problem and the problems
associated with overpopulation took place a number of years ago, as a
matter of fact. I don’t have a great deal of involvement with spay and
neutering and overpopulation today, and I haven’t had for quite a long
time. I do know that — going again back some number of years back to the
60s and 70s and so on — the problem of overpopulation — and I don’t want
to minimize what it is today — but the problem of overpopulation in my
judgment back then was far and away greater than it is today. I think
that the opposition — not the opposition — but the resistance to having
animals spayed and neutered was far greater back then than it is today.

Rowe: You mean it was ignorance? Was it ignorance that was the
fundamental feature there?

Kilroy: I think ignorance certainly was a significant influence XE
"euthanasia" \\r "euthan9" . I also think economics was another
significant influence. Frankly, I think up until, again, perhaps
beginning around the 70s, I don’t think humane societies — I don’t think
the humane community, the animal protection community, the animal
sheltering community did a good job in addressing overpopulation. I
think it did a very, very poor job of educating the public to the
consequences of — the pet-owning public — to the consequences of
overpopulation. In fact, most organizations — it’s my recollection that
most organizations at that time that operated sheltering services and so
on not only didn’t acknowledge how many animals they were destroying as
unwanted, as surplus, for which there weren’t any homes — they were
concealing that from the public. While on the one hand I understand why
they may have felt that they needed to do that in some instances —

Rowe: Because — what are some of the other reasons? Because they would
look bad?

Kilroy: Because they would look bad, because they were concerned about
being labeled and, in fact in some instances, already had been labeled
“slaughterhouses.” More legitimately, because if in fact they gained the
reputation for destroying most of the animals that they received, then
people wouldn’t bring animals to them and, in fact in many instances, as
an alternative and a very unacceptable alternative, abandon the animals,
let them go on the street wherever, with the attitude that, “Well, at
least they have a chance of survival if I just drop it off somewhere,
whereas if I take it to a humane society shelter it will almost
certainly be or probably be destroyed.”

I remember one year, in fact, I did some research into the number of
animals that we had handled at MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" during that year. I don’t
remember what year it was now, but I’m guessing it to have been during
the 60s or 70s, early 70s. We had handled 87,000 stray and unwanted
animals in our sheltering system. I don’t know what that is today, but I
don’t think it’s probably even half that number today. Incidentally,
principally, primarily, dogs and cats. Eighty-five percent of those, as
I recall — eighty-five percent of those animals that we handled — were
being destroyed.

I remember, too — and, again, David Claflin XE "Claflin, David" was the
president XE "media" \\r "media8" — when a grassroots — the
representative of a grassroots volunteer group XE "public
relations/outreach" \\r "media8" , which may have been called the Animal
Birth Control Action League XE "Animal Birth Control Action League" back
then, called me and asked me if I would participate in a panel
discussion, again on a public service television station. It was Channel
2 or 44 once again. A program called “Catch-22 XE "Catch-22 \[television
program\]" .” If I would participate in a panel discussion on that
program with representatives of the veterinary community and animal
control community and other animal related interests and would be
willing to acknowledge publicly on this program how many animals we
received, and of the numbers we received, how many we actually placed
and how many in fact were destroyed.

I went to the president again and asked for permission to not only
participate in the panel discussion but to do so very honestly and
acknowledge, in fact, how many animals we were destroying. He gave that
authorization. I’m willing to bet it’s the first time that that kind of
thing was done, certainly in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , by
anybody representing a humane organization, and maybe on the East Coast,
if not almost nationwide.

Rowe: Did the president need much persuading of your case?

Kilroy: No, he didn’t, as a matter of fact. We talked about sort of the
upsides and downsides of it. No, he agreed pretty quickly. I was pretty
pleased.

Rowe: What was the response on the show and afterwards of your
admission?

Kilroy: As I recall, one of the things that may have been presented on
that show was also a film — and again, this goes back a long way so I
don’t remember it clearly — a film or excerpts from a film that focused
on the number of animals that were being destroyed in this country by
pounds and shelters throughout the country. My recollection is the title
of the film was “All the Animals are Crying XE "All the Animals are
Crying \[film\]" ,” or something of that nature. They actually showed
animals being destroyed. This film actually presented scenes of animals
being destroyed and essentially mounds and barrels of carcasses of
animals. My recollection, once again, was that the film had quite an
impact, but I can’t remember.

Rowe: An impact publicly.

Kilroy: Yes.

Rowe: The fact is that there are now half as — you think half as many
animals being euthanized now than there were nearly thirty years ago or
thirty years ago. This is partly humane education.

Kilroy: Definitely.

Rowe: But it’s also presumably — what other features? The spay and
neuter clinics?

Kilroy: Yes XE "veterinary medicine" \\r "vet9" , the spay and neuter
clinics, but also — I would say, going back to those days, there was a
much greater reluctance on the part of the veterinary community to
accept that spay and neutering of animals, given the magnitude of the
problem of animal overpopulation, that spaying and neutering of animals
was going to have a very significant impact on that problem, that
spaying and neutering could contribute little more than a drop to the
bucket in terms of impacting —

Rowe: They went on the reverse.

Kilroy: That’s changed a lot. Veterinarians today are much more
supportive of the value of spaying and neutering for impacting
overpopulation. I’m not suggesting that back then nor today that spay
and neuter by itself is going to eliminate the problems of
overpopulation. But I do think that the veterinary community has joined
the animal protection community, the humane community, in promoting the
importance of, the value of, for both health and overpopulation reasons,
spaying and neutering of animals.

Rowe: Now pet shops — a pet peeve, I would think perhaps for you going
way back to when you first rescued those turtles from a pet shop XE "pet
shops" \\r "pet1" .

Kilroy: Pet shops always have been and continue to be a pet peeve, as a
matter of fact XE "law and legislation" \\r "pet1" .

Rowe: You have written about the need to regulate pet shops. I’d like
you to talk about some of the problems that you’ve come across as a law
enforcement officer when it comes to pet shops, some of the scenes, and
some of the steps that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" has taken, given the fact that
it initially had that — it couldn’t lobby for legislation on a thing
like that — the way it’s tried to make the public aware of the problems
that you came across in pet shops.

Kilroy: We’ve certainly used our publications for that purpose, to
highlight some of the problems that we’ve observed and experienced with
pet shops. In the past I’ve done radio and television programs in which
pet shops have been a part of the topics of discussion.

Rowe: I should say pet shops here are those that are selling live
animals.

Kilroy: That’s right.

Rowe: We should make that clear for people reading this interview,
rather than pet supply stores.

Kilroy: No, these are definitely shops that are engaged in the sale of
either birds, mammals, or reptiles, or all three. In Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" now they must be licensed and they are subject to rules
and regulations. While there have been dramatic improvements, as far as
I’m concerned, in the way that pet shops operate and must operate
because of the presence of the licensing statute and rules and
regulations, the reality is there are still problems in pet shops.

We still have problems of pet shops that have animals that are
overcrowded in cages, that have animals that are sick and aren’t
properly isolated, that aren’t receiving the proper medical attention,
veterinary medical attention, problems of pet shops employing cruel
methods of euthanasia. We don’t have, as far as I’m concerned, yet
effective enforcement or system of enforcement of pet shop rules and
regulations. We do not, and that’s something that is desperately needed.
I think until we have that we’re going to continue to have problems in
pet shops, and not many pet shops, I might add. There are relatively few
that are chronic problem operations, but we are going to continue to
have some of these kinds of problems until we have a better system of
enforcement.

What we continue to need, as far as I’m concerned, today in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , in conjunction with the rules and
regulations, are a few amendments to the rules and regulations. But more
importantly, we need a citation system, a system which would allow
inspectors and law enforcement officers, humane officers, to issue
tickets with escalating fines, in which there would be a right of
appeal, when they detect violations, because currently there are only
two ways in which to address violations. One is to ask for a hearing
before the licensing agency, which can take months. Even then they only
have the authority to suspend or revoke a license. In twenty-five years
there has never been a license suspended or revoked. There is strong
resistance to suspending or revoking licenses for fear of putting a pet
shop out of business, basically.

Rowe: Why?

Kilroy: Because it’s a pro-business government that we have. During the
more than twenty-five years since the pet shop law passed back around
1973, there has never been a single pet shop that I can recall, nor can
the licensing agency recall, that has suffered a license revocation or
suspension. There have been a few instances in which pet shops have been
quarantined. There have been a number of instances in which, as a result
of a hearing, pet shops have been required to meet the requirements of
regulations or a regulation within a specified or a certain period of
time under the threat of a suspension or revocation. But there’s never
been a suspension or a revocation.

Rowe: And in your judgment there are at least several pet shops that
would fall under the aegis of being revoked, having their licenses
revoked.

Kilroy: There have been any number of instances in the past where in my
judgment pet shops should have suffered minimally a license suspension.
In my judgment, in the past there have been pet shops that have received
licenses when in fact they haven’t been in compliance with the rules and
regulations. That should have disqualified them from receiving a license
in the first place. It’s really a — it’s sort of an institutional
philosophy almost, policy, of the Department of Agriculture XE
"Department of Agriculture (Massachusetts)" to be more accommodating and
inclined to compromise than to effectively and rigidly enforce the law
and regulations.

Rowe: The Department of Agriculture XE "Department of Agriculture
(Massachusetts)" has jurisdiction over pet shops.

Kilroy: That’s right.

Rowe: That sounds very strange. Does that sound strange to you?

Kilroy: No. I don’t know who else you would give the responsibility for
licensing pet shops to. There are only a few agencies that would have
the kind of expertise to administer a program of pet shop licensing and
implementation or enforcement of rules and regulations. Conceivably it
could go to the Department of Public Health XE "Department of Public
Health (Massachusetts)" , but there aren’t many people involved with
animals in Public Health. It could go to Fish and Wildlife XE "Division
of Fisheries and Wildlife (Massachusetts)" or environmental police, but
they deal primarily with protected species of wildlife.

So agriculture, which deals with a wide variety of types of animals —
most notably, most often domestic and large animals but also things like
poultry and so on. They have veterinarians and other people that are
qualified by training and/or experience to deal with animals of the
kinds that you most often see in pet shops. So it’s a logical agency to
have the responsibility. It would never be — this authority would never
be given to a private agency like MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , and that I understand.

Rowe: Because it’s —

Kilroy: Because we’re an advocacy organization, to begin with. We’re
private.

Rowe: It’s a conflict of interest.

Kilroy: Sure.

Rowe: How about the connection between pet shops and puppy mills XE
"animal dealers:puppy mills" and the production of animals simply for
sale XE "dogs" ?

Kilroy: There is no question that most — I dare say most of the puppies
that are being offered to the pet-consuming public in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" through pet shops are pups that originate from what we
would call puppy mills.

Rowe: Has there been an effort to regulate that, draw attention to that?
You’ve done that through your publications.

Kilroy: We’ve done it through our publications.

Rowe: But again your stymied by your legal positioning, or you were?

Kilroy: No. The society — when you say by our legal positioning —

Rowe: Well, you weren’t allowed to advocate, but you are allowed now.

Kilroy: Yes, we are. As a matter of fact, in the last ten years I’ve
twice now made formal appeals to the Department of Agriculture XE
"Department of Agriculture (Massachusetts)" — the first time to
substantially amend the pet shop licensing rules and regulations. Again,
a committee was appointed. I served on that committee. Over a period of
about a year — I can’t remember exactly for how long — we proposed and
ultimately had enacted, through public hearings, enormous, dramatic,
extensive changes to the rules and regulations. So the rules and
regulations today that have been established to govern pet shop
operations, I would say, are easily, easily ten times better than they
were ten years ago.

Rowe: Give us an example of what it was before and what it is now.

Kilroy: I’d almost have to look at the rules and regulations. But there
were numerous loopholes and omissions in the original rules and
regulations. It’s amazing, but I can’t think of what they are right at
this moment. If I had them in front of me I could. I know I went through
the old rules and regulations and the new ones, highlighting all the
changes to the new ones at one point in time with a highlighter. There
was far more highlighting than not highlighting. But we still have some
problems.

Rowe: Was it in terms of numbers of animals or was it the care of those
animals?

Kilroy: It was the care but it was also the language, the subjective
nature of the language in the rules and regulations, the loopholes.
There was confusion and ambiguity surrounding the requirement for
isolation of new arrivals to ensure that they did not expose existing
animals to potential disease and so on.

\[End Tape 2, Side A; Begin Tape 2, Side B\]

Rowe: Continue some of the specifications you had mentioned about the
pet shop regulations.

Kilroy: One of the problems we commonly had in the past with pet shops
was the way in which they were maintaining birds XE "birds" in
overcrowded situations. And they would place feed — if they had a cage
that was fully crammed with birds. They would be clinging not only to
the perches but to the sides of the cages. There wasn’t enough perch
space. The rules and regulations didn’t adequately address that to
prevent that from happening. They would place water containers and food
containers on the floor of the cages so the birds were defecating in
their own food and water all the time. The rules and regulations were
not adequate to address that. There was not a recognition that different
ambient temperatures were needed for different species. The rules and
regulations were not adequate to address and prevent those kinds of
problems XE "birds" .

It was just on and on and on. There were numerous problems. The whole
issue of illumination. Illumination for purposes of inspection was not
addressed in the rules and regulations so that an officer might need a
flashlight in some instances in a back room in order to inspect an
animal or animals that were being stored in the back room. There was
nothing to keep a pet shop from keeping animals in cages that
essentially absorbed rather than repelled moisture, absorbed urine and
so on, and that was addressed with changes in the rules and regulations.
We had pet shops that would have collections of animals in rooms that
had carpeting that would become soiled with fecal and urine. That sort
of thing has been eliminated. There were simply numerous problems with
the existing rules and regulations ten years ago, most of which have
been eliminated. However, there remain things that we asked for that we
did not get.

Rowe: Such as?

Kilroy: For example, we wanted a regulation that obligated a pet shop
owner to provide veterinary medical attention for an animal that
exhibited symptoms — diagnostic attention — that exhibited symptoms of
illness, injury, and suffering, or euthanasia as the alternative. We did
not get that. So for us to do something in response to that kind of a
problem, we have to actually operate under the general anti-cruelty law,
which is a criminal statute which is a much more time-consuming process.
It’s not practical in a pet shop situation in most cases. So that’s
something we did not get.

We actually had a very serious problem a few years ago. We learned that
a number of pet shops were freezing to death small living rodents XE
"rodents" , baby mice and hamsters and gerbils and other types of
animals, to be used as or sold for snake XE "snakes" and lizard food.
They would simply put the live babies into a freezer and freeze them to
death. So we wanted a regulatory change, a change in the regulations,
that would have required that the methods of euthanasia employed by a
pet shop be only those approved by the American Veterinary Medical
Association XE "American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)"
\[AVMA\]. We did not get that change in the rules and regulations.
Again, we have to go after people who might employ that practice under
the criminal statute. In fact, when we learned that, we sent letters to
every pet shop in the state making them aware of the fact that this
practice was in violation of the law, and if we were to become aware of
this practice being used from that day forward by a pet shop we would
definitely seek criminal complaints against the pet shop.

But we didn’t get that change in the regulations, which we should have,
as far as I’m concerned. So these are a couple of the more major
examples of what we were looking for that we did not get. But we got
probably ninety percent or more of what we were looking for. So what’s
wrong today? The major problem today, other than these omissions, is the
inadequacy of the system of enforcement.

Rowe: Just not enough people?

Kilroy: It’s not even a case of not enough people. It’s a case of the
process of enforcement. It’s too time-consuming, too cumbersome. There’s
a resistance to employing it because of the time required.

Rowe: By law enforcement agencies?

Kilroy: By the licensing agency which has the authority to conduct
hearings on requests for suspension or revocation. It’s such a long
process, one that consumes so much time and personnel resources, so to
speak, that there’s a reluctance on their part to pursue that.
Especially when they realize, I’m sure in most instances, they’re not
going to get a license suspended or revoked.

Rowe: Because there is no evidence of it ever having succeeded.

Kilroy: Yes. There’s a real reluctance. Yes. And also because the
violations are often not considered major. They’re not sort of felony
violations, so you don’t want to suspend or revoke a license. But
because there’s just no penalty for these kinds of violations, there is
no deterrent to engage in these kind of violations. While some pet shops
operate very responsibly and ethically and humanely, others chronically
violate the regulations and get away with it, don’t worry about it and
often ignore the requirements of the regulations, recognizing there are
to be no consequences.

Rowe: How extensive have been your efforts and how successful have they
been — by they I mean the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" — in encouraging people to
adopt from shelters and to eschew pet shops altogether, especially with
cats and dogs? Obviously, with birds it’s a bit more difficult, but with
cats and dogs.

Kilroy: I don’t honestly know the answer to that question. Carter Luke
XE "Luke, Carter" would be a better source of that information. I would
guess that humane organizations have had a significant impact, but Luke
would probably have a much better handle on that.

Rowe: Okay XE "zoos" \\r "zoo1" . Let’s go to zoos. You wrote about
zoos. You’ve had an interesting position. You understood those people
who thought that all zoos as confinement situations were bad but that
you had as a youngster had gone to zoos. It was the only way that you as
an urban youth could see wildlife, and that really turned you on to
becoming a humane animal welfare officer and lifelong advocate. You also
think that they had a role in conservation and that zoos were changing.
In fact, you yourself were a consultant in the establishment of the
African tropical forest at Franklin Park XE "Franklin Park Zoo" Zoo in
Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" that you had gone to as a boy and had
sought to make it a different type of zoo. Have you had any reason to
change your mind about that? Have your feelings changed since you wrote
that article, which was actually some time ago, I believe, since you
worked on that.

Kilroy: I would be less than honest if I didn’t acknowledge again that
zoos in my childhood — or a zoo, I should say — during my childhood
\[was\] a very major and positive impact on my impressions of animals,
on my interest in animals, on my empathy with animals. In fact, it was
then Franklin Park XE "Franklin Park Zoo" Zoo here in the Dorchester
section of Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" that was within walking
distance of where I lived that I visited on a regular basis. I enjoyed
the experience enormously.

You have to remember, when I was a youngster there were very few
wildlife programs on television. They were all in black and white, at
least on the television that I was accustomed to watching. Most of the
wildlife I saw was in Tarzan movies. So to have the opportunity to see
real live magnificent wild animals was a very positive experience
initially.

Rowe: But you would also say that they serve a purpose even now because
there is nothing like seeing a live animal. Or maybe that’s a
mischaracterization.

Kilroy: No, it’s not necessarily a mischaracterization. I’ve always felt
that in fact the living animal is the best ambassador of its own
species. I don’t think films or photographs are as impressive,
impressive as they may be, as seeing the animal firsthand. I mean, I’m
still in awe of a lot of wild animals, even a lot of wild animals I’ve
seen time and time and time again.

Having said that, I’m not as convinced, nevertheless, that there is as
much legitimacy today for zoos as I thought there had been earlier in
life. I have a tendency much more today to empathize with the captivity,
so to speak, the confinement of the animal. I have reservations about
zoos today that I didn’t have thirty years ago. I’ve had reservations
about zoos for many years. There have been bad zoos, I’m sure, since the
beginning of time, and some horrible zoos, as a matter of fact. I think
they have made major improvements in the way some zoos operate and the
kinds of facilities that some zoos maintain. But I also recognize that
there are zoos that are still — especially roadside zoos but even
probably in some cases municipal zoos and others — that leave a lot to
be desired from the standpoint of humane considerations.

Rowe: You were brought as a consultant. You were brought in — this was a
period of transition for you. You had left the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" for three
years.

Kilroy: Two years.

Rowe: Two years and four months actually. And that you had worked in
sort of generally the construction business and that had not been
satisfactory for you. Then you came back as a consultant for this
tropical forest project, right?

Kilroy: I came back as a management consultant with the principal
responsibility of overseeing the completion of that particular facility.

Rowe: And the idea was that you would not only be an expert in the care
and concern for the animals but that you would do so in a way that it
would be — they would be as free as possible. Was that one of your
concerns?

Kilroy: Well, that was pretty well established. The design of the
African tropical forest was sort of cast in concrete, in granite, by the
time I got involved. That was a project that had been in progress for a
number of years.

Rowe: But there were no cages as such, I believe. It was more disguised
moats and —

Kilroy: Yes. It’s a much more natural kind of setting. In the final
analysis, even an exhibit of that sophistication becomes a cage. It’s a
cage with a lot more furniture in it, with a lot more distractions for
the animals, with a lot more opportunities to engage in natural
locomotion in some instances, but it’s still just the same a much more
luxurious and in many instances much larger and more acceptable cage.

Rowe: So how did you feel about taking on this project? What did you
hope to contribute when you were involved with this project given your
reservations?

Kilroy: That’s a hard question to answer actually. I guess I was —
again, because of my childhood involvement with that particular zoo —
and incidentally, I had had other involvement with that zoo later as a
law enforcement person in which — I don’t know how to answer that
question. Do you know that? I just don’t know how to answer that
question. I’ve never thought about it.

Rowe: Was it an element of nostalgia that you were the kid who had been
on the outside and now you were on the inside?

Kilroy: Well, I have never thought about it before. There’s no question
that that was certainly a real consideration. But I think maybe another
consideration, as I just mentioned and I had long since forgotten, there
was a point in time when I had served on — there were a number of years
when I had served on the board of directors of the Boston Zoological
Society XE "Boston Zoological Society" , which was the co-manager with
the Metropolitan District Commission XE "Metropolitan (Boston) District
Commission" , a state agency, of the Franklin Park XE "Franklin Park
Zoo" and Walter D. Stone Memorial Zoos XE "Walter D. Stone Memorial Zoo"
. I had served on the Boston Zoological Society’s XE "Boston Zoological
Society" board of directors. I had served as the chairman of their
Animal Policy Committee and I had served as the chairman of their Animal
Policy Steering Committee, as a result of which I spent a number of
years very intimately involved in the pursuit and development of animal
acquisition and disposition, disposal, policies, animal care and
handling policies and practices and procedures. In that instance I was
principally interested in ensuring that the way in which animals were
acquired and handled and disposed of and so on and maintained — the ways
in which all of that happened — were very humane and responsible and
ethical.

While over those number of years we made great progress on paper, I
became increasingly disappointed with, disenchanted with, the failure of
the administration of the zoos at that time to implement those policies
and to employ the practices and procedures that had been agreed upon by
the committee and approved by the board. Ultimately, in response to my
dissatisfaction with so many practices of the zoos, I resigned in
protest. In fact — and I had acknowledged my intent long before I did
this, that if things didn’t improve I was going to do what I did — that
I would essentially blow the whistle on the zoo.

I was in a position at that time in the society in which I oversaw the
operation of the law enforcement department XE "law and legislation" \\r
"law9" . I then directed for the next several months a law enforcement
department investigation into these very zoos we’re talking about,
Franklin Park XE "Franklin Park Zoo" in particular, which resulted in us
making major demands for changes in the zoos’ operations and practices.

Rowe: Let me go back to what they had said. Was it inertia that they
didn’t do it? Was it arrogance? Was it unwillingness to allocate
resources? Why hadn’t they changed?

Kilroy: It was all of those things. It was inertia, it was arrogance, it
was institutional —

Rowe: Complacency?

Kilroy: — complacency and ego, personalities in some instances, who just
believed that their way was the best way even though it might have been
the worst way.

Rowe: So you instituted an investigation. And what happened?

Kilroy: I assumed responsibility — very direct and continuing
responsibility — for overseeing and directing that investigation, even
though at that time I was not director of law enforcement. It resulted
in their making a number of changes to the exhibits at the zoo. It
resulted in their disposing of — basically passing on to other better
equipped and qualified institutions some of the animals that they had.
It resulted in a lot of positive changes.

Again, it was a long time ago, but we produced a long report. \[We\] met
with the chairman of the Boston Zoo Society XE "Boston Zoological
Society" and also the commissioner of the Metropolitan District
Commission XE "Metropolitan (Boston) District Commission" and
essentially made a lot of demands and said if those demands were not
accommodated we were going to seek criminal complaints. This would
obviously capture a great deal of public attention which would have
reduced their public financial support, which would have also probably
adversely impacted the animals. So we were trying to avoid the pursuit
of criminal action but determined to do so if we couldn’t get the
changes that we were seeking. And we got those changes.

Rowe: You didn’t have to resort to criminal action.

Kilroy: No, we did not.

Rowe: Was your involvement with the African tropical forest in some ways
an outcome of your agitation, that they felt they had to bring you on
board just to make sure that everything was —

Kilroy: I joined them in that capacity at a much later time. I’m almost
surprised that they would have me.

Rowe: Your reputation must have — as you say, your reputation was of
somebody who would agitate from without if they weren’t accommodated
from within.

Kilroy: Yes. Also, the person who at that time was the director of the
zoos was a veterinarian who had actually been a member of the staff of
Angell Memorial XE "Angell Memorial Veterinary Hospital" and who knew me
very well. He was clearly comfortable with me because he was something
of an agitator himself.

Rowe: I just want to mention to people reading this interview that
Walter Kilroy has also written about rodeos and bloodless bullfighting.
I would refer people to those particular issues since we’re running out
of time here and I don’t want to go into too much detail into that. We
can always talk about it if we have more time about your involvement
with those kinds of issues.

But I wanted to talk to you about something that you mentioned to me
outside of the interview last time which struck me as very interesting
XE "women and animals" \\r "women1" . That is the role of women in the
organization and in humane care and your observations over the last
forty years of gender differences and the way that men relate towards
animals and the way women related to animals and that idea. Just reflect
upon what you said to me. You may not be able to remember what you said
to me, but the kinds of ideas that you’ve had.

Kilroy: I don’t remember what I said to you, but I do know I have fairly
definitive feelings about the role women have played and the changes in
the role or roles that women have played in the field of animal
protection and the humane field basically. Because when I joined this
field, when I joined this organization, most of the executive positions
— most of the higher administrative positions, frankly — were occupied
by men. Today and certainly during recent years there have been just as
many occupied by women, probably at times more of those positions being
occupied by women. In my own experience in looking for candidates for
positions within the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , you find that frequently you have — I
think anyway — more often women responding to opportunities to work in
this field than men.

I’m inclined to believe to some extent that may be attributable to the
perception on the part of men to be sensitive and humane and so on is
not all that masculine. Most men don’t like to show, I don’t think,
sensitivity or emotion. Women, I think, are much more comfortable with
that in most instances than men. But I also think that experience has
shown, for me anyway, that — this is going to sound sexist in reverse —
and maybe it’s because we get more women applying. I’m not sure. Boy, am
I dancing around this. I have found that much more often I’ve seen very
intelligent women, capable women, working in this field, attracted to
this field, than comparably intelligent and capable men.

Rowe: Let me put two ideas to you, that the reason why there weren’t as
many women in the early 60s was because there were just fewer women in
the workplace anyway and the feminist movement and the emerging women’s
movement allowed more women to enter the place. The other thing is that,
like education and other things, this profession is not as highly paid
as other businesses.

Kilroy: Exactly. I agree with that.

Rowe: To what extent do those two aspects affect your judgment about
women and men involved with humane activities?

Kilroy: I agree with both of your observations. I think those are both
very definite influences on the numbers of women versus men that were
involved in this field thirty or forty years ago. But I also think that
women are more comfortable with or are apt to be more attracted to
humane sensitivity. I don’t know how else — I’m having a tough time
articulating it.

Rowe: They respond more — because there are two things that are being
said here. One, that they’re more intelligent, and the other thing is
that they’re more sensitive. I don’t want to put words into your mouth,
but are you suggesting that their ability to take their feelings of care
and concern about the animals and translate them into meaningful action
— that’s the intelligent aspect, meaningful action, taking positions,
deciding on a solution, implementing policy — is more highly developed
in women than it is in men who, perhaps because they don’t understand
their sensitivities because they haven’t accessed them, consequently
don’t implement logical or intelligent policies in order to ameliorate
those positions.

Kilroy: At least in the past, I simply think that women in recent years
have had opportunities in this field that they may not have had in other
fields in which their intelligence is recognized and valued and
utilized, and as a result of which I think we’ve attracted more women in
recent years than in the more distant past. I also think, however, that
because women in general — I’m inclined to believe that women in general
are much more comfortable with feelings of sensitivity and allowing
those feelings of sensitivity to show than are men, that they are more
apt to be more comfortable working in a field in which that’s accepted
or at least much more acceptable than it has been perceived to be by
men.

Therefore, there are apt to be more women today and in recent years
coming to this field, working in this field, and doing so comfortably in
this field, than men. Certainly there has been a major — in my judgment
— a major change in the numbers of women working in this field today in
the last fifteen or even twenty years than forty years ago. I agree that
the two observations you made earlier about there were fewer women in
the workforce forty years ago — that’s certainly a very valid
observation. But I think the two things I’ve just mentioned are equally
valid. Now, I may be way off the mark here.

Rowe: It’s an interesting observation given the fact that in many animal
advocacy organizations the foot soldiers are often female but the heads
of the organizations, the people in the offices, the people in charge,
are often male. Would I be wrong in thinking that the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
is no exception to this?

Kilroy: We have not had a woman president, but we have had female vice
presidents. HSUS XE "Humane Society of the United States (HSUS)"
\[Humane Society of the United States\] has female vice presidents. I
don’t know what ASPCA \[American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals XE "American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(ASPCA)" \] is today, to be honest with you. I’m not as well plugged in
to the humane community nationally as I once was.

Rowe: But do you think it’s a matter of time before the head of the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" is a woman?

Kilroy: Oh, I have no doubt that at some point in time there will be a
woman president of MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and of other major organizations, as there
have been in other organizations around the country.

Rowe: Do you think that in and of itself would change the tenor of the
organization, the way the organization is perceived, functions, in any
particular way?

Kilroy: I don’t think necessarily.

Rowe: Let’s expand the question. Has the organization changed as an
organization with the influx of women over the years?

Kilroy: I would say yes. I would say definitely. And how? I would say
the organization as an organization is a more sensitive organization
than it was forty years ago.

Rowe: In that?

Kilroy: It’s more humanely sensitive. I mean, there are things today in
this organization that are much more readily accepted — philosophies and
so on, humane sensitivity, vegetarianism, for example. Now, I’m sure
there are other influences that have been at work as well.

Rowe: What other types of philosophies? More an animal rights oriented
view do you mean philosophies or what other?

Kilroy: This is certainly, in my judgment, a more activist organization
than it had been twenty years ago because it would have to be to
survive, as far as I’m concerned. But I also think women have played a
major role in the evolution of the change that has taken place.

Rowe: Because they’re more open to new ideas as well as being more
sensitive?

Kilroy: I think they’re more sensitive. I think that sometimes they’re
more — it’s not open to new ideas — but they’re more comfortable with
exhibiting non-traditional views and — I hate the term but — more
radical positions than a lot of men are. Again, perhaps that too is a
part of not wanting to appear to be too sensitive, too emotional, unduly
emotional. I know that there’s a concern on the part of women today
about that as well in business.

Rowe: There’s a distinction between radical ideas and being emotional.
Many of these ideas are — if I’m guessing what you’re talking about,
animal rights and vegetarianism — it’s that they are less conservative
period, with a small C. They’re concerned about changing things and
stopping abuse in a more systemic way. So in a funny way it’s not just
emotion, it’s more of a sort of world view that they’re bringing. Am I
right in thinking that? You wouldn’t go so far.

Kilroy: I’m not sure. I’m not sure.

Rowe: All right. I think we’ve covered that. I thought it was a very
interesting statement that you made, and I’m glad we had a chance to
look at the organization from that historical perspective as well as —

Kilroy: Ask Luke XE "Luke, Carter" about that.

Rowe: I will ask him about that as well XE "animal rights
movement/animal protection community" \\r "environ1" . You mentioned to
Carmen Lee XE "Lee, Carmen" , actually, in a previous email to her — she
emailed me this discussion — that you felt that the environmental XE
"environmentalism" \\r "environ1" movement had had an impact on the
animal welfare movement. I would like you to discuss what is meant by
the environmental movement. I’ll just provide you with some pointers
here. Of course, since 1970 there’s been Earth Day XE "Earth Day" , so
there’s been the environment movement which has been a sort of general
broad coalition of generally liberal causes. But there has also been the
movement of people — of groups such as Ducks Unlimited XE "Ducks
Unlimited" , which has worked with environmental groups to set aside
land specifically for hunting purposes but to protect land in that
regard. Could you give me an idea of what you mean by the environmental
movement’s effect, what attitudes you think have been effective?

Kilroy: Well, when I say that the humane movement in a sense has ridden
the coattails of the environmental movement, I’m really talking about
what I consider to be — at least in my lifetime — that time, during my
lifetime, when the environmental movement got the kind of attention or
began to get the kind of attention and credibility to its concerns that
I don’t think it had necessarily enjoyed previously. I’m really talking
about the publication of Rachel XE "Carson, Rachel" Carson’s book, The
Silent Spring XE "Silent Spring, The" . To me, that was the beginning of
the environmental movement in this country being taken increasingly more
seriously and their concerns being taken increasingly more seriously.

I do think to some extent that has paved the way, that has made it — the
evolution of that has made the evolution of the animal protection/animal
rights movement and the credibility that it enjoys today increasingly
so, as far as I’m concerned. It helped facilitate that, as a matter of
fact. The precedent, in a sense, had been set through the activities of
the environmental movement and the credibility that that movement
received. I don’t know how clear I’m being.

Rowe: It’s an interesting perspective. So you would see the animal
welfare movement and the animal rights movement as extending out of the
consciousness raised by the environmental movement rather than being —
and perhaps sort of more — not rural — but ecological concern, rather
than the traditional history of the humane movement in the United States
and in England XE "England" which was an urban, rights-based extension
of cruelty to children and other urban cruelty issues and also the
abolition of the slaves, anti-slavery movements, and also the women’s
movement. So you would see it —

Kilroy: I’m not suggesting that the success, to the extent that there
has been success, of the animal protection humane movement is
attributable exclusively to or entirely to or even largely to the
environmental movement and its success. I just think that the
environmental movement enjoyed a greater degree of success in dealing
with the kinds of issues that it was dealing with at the time it began
to really enjoy that success than was the humane movement. The
environmental movement was getting much more — during that time; I’m
talking really about the 50s, 60s, and so on — was getting much more
attention, much more media attention, much more almost legitimacy in
response to its concerns about its principal issues than was the animal
protection movement at that same time about its concerns.

So I think that helped facilitate, nevertheless, the evolution of the
credibility that the humane movement, the animal protection movement,
enjoys today about its concerns of today. I am not for a moment
diminishing or trivializing what preceded that in the animal protection
movement.

Rowe: I understand. I’d like to close the interview with asking you a
question about something that was mentioned by Frederick Davis XE
"Davis, Frederick" when you were appointed vice president, I believe, in
1985. He said that you know “the most effective ways to improve life for
animals.” I thought you would be able to tell us what they are.

Kilroy: \[Laughter\] XE "education" \\r "educ1" . I’m not sure I know
the most effective ways to improve life for animals\] XE "media" \\r
"educ1" . Certainly as far as I’m concerned the most effective way is
education. The single most effective way is effective education. I don’t
know where he got that from. I don’t ever remember seeing that, as a
matter of fact.

I also think that the best way to educate people today, obviously, and
the most effective way, is through the media, and in particular through
television but not television exclusively. I just think the media has
had such an enormous impact on public attitudes, on the public’s level
of awareness, of concern. With the explosion of information and
communication, there has been, as far as I’m concerned, a dramatic
increase in the public’s level of awareness and concern. I don’t profess
to know the most effective ways.

Rowe: When you say education, do you mean everything from teaching
people about animal suffering through to caring for your cat?

Kilroy: Absolutely.

Rowe: Are there other areas of education that you feel are more
important than others, or is it a very broad-based general raising of
consciousness and knowledge.

Kilroy: I think it’s a very broad-based general raising of consciousness
and awareness. It would be wonderful, it would be magnificent, if in
fact we could introduce and have presented in every school formal
classroom programs that address humane education. That would be great.
It’s also unrealistic. It’s just, in my judgment, not going to happen —
hasn’t and won’t.

Rowe: Okay. I’m going to ask you one final question, which is two parts.
The first one is, in your course of over forty years involvement —
forty-five years of involvement — what are you most proud of? And
finally, what one thing do you wish you could have achieved as somebody
involved with the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ?

Kilroy: God, they’re both tough questions, Martin. What am I most proud
of? I don’t know the answer to that.

Rowe: Is it maybe the consistency of getting things done?

Kilroy: I’m proud — and I am very proud — of the effort that I’ve made.
It’s been a sustained effort. I’m proud of what I believe to have been
the contributions I’ve made to the protection of animals and the
advancement of animal welfare. I believe I’ve made some — for me, at
least — what have been important contributions. I’m proud of those
things XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" .

I’m proud of what I believe to have been the influence that I’ve had
with a lot of people that I’ve worked with in terms of helping them help
animals, help the movement. I’m proud of those things really. I’m proud
of having survived in this movement for as long as I have.

Rowe: It can be a tough movement.

Kilroy: It can be. It’s emotionally very intense, sometimes very
challenging, demanding, at times frustrating, but also an enormously
rewarding field of endeavor. But I’m proud I’ve survived it up to this
point in time. What was the other question?

Rowe: Regrets.

Kilroy: Oh, I’ll always regret all the things that I didn’t succeed at.
I regret right now very much that we haven’t, as far as I’m concerned,
ended the practice of drowning of wildlife XE "wildlife" — you know,
so-called nuisance wildlife — in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" . That
bothers me a lot. I regret that we still haven’t had — or I still
haven’t had certainly — the impact on pet shop XE "pet shops" problems
that I would like to have. If I thought about it I’m sure I could come
up with an almost endless list of regrets, probably that being longer
than the list of accomplishments of which I’m proud.

Rowe: Do you think the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" is generally headed in the
right direction? Do you think it missed any opportunities?

Kilroy: I do think the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" is heading in the right
direction. As a matter of fact, in recent years in particular I have
been very confident in and proud of the direction of the MSPCA, of the
leadership that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" has had over the last ten years in
particular. I think the organization’s future is bright and assured and
very promising.

Rowe: Okay.

Kilroy: Thank you, Martin.

Rowe: Thank you.

\[End of Session\].

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

INDEX \\h " " \\c "1" \\e " "

All the Animals are Crying \[film\] 40

American Humane Education Society 25

American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) 24, 50

American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) 44

Angell Memorial Animal Hospital 1, 6, 8, 9, 13, 27

Angell Memorial Veterinary Hospital 48

Angell, George Thorndike 24

Animal Birth Control Action League 39

animal dealers

puppy mills 42

animal experimentation and testing 11–13, 16–17

animal pounds

pound seizure 19, 20

Animal Rescue League of Boston 7

animal rescues 4, 10–11, 26–27

animal rights movement/animal protection community 52–54

animal shelters 21–23

Animal Welfare Act 19

birds 1, 10–11, 43, 44

bald eagles 26–27

Bishop, Amy Bend 21

Boston Globe 37

Boston Zoological Society 47, 48

Bussey’s Institute 7

campaigning/lobbying 19–21

Canada 33

Toronto 30

Canadian Association for Humane Trapping 30

Carson, Rachel 52

Catch-22 \[television program\] 39

children and animals 4–6

Children’s Museum 7

Claflin, David 30, 31, 39

Committee on Natural Resources and Agriculture (Massachusetts) 33, 37

culture/tradition/customs 22-24

Cummings, Bob 30, 31

Davis, Frederick 53

Department of Agriculture (Massachusetts) 42, 43

Department of Public Health (Massachusetts) 42

Division of Fisheries and Wildlife (Massachusetts) 32, 33, 35, 36, 42

dogs 11–14, 42

Ducks Unlimited 32, 52

Earth Day 52

education 53

England See Great Britain

environmental issues/environmental movement 52–53

euthanasia 9–10, 38–40

exotic animals 28

Federal-Provincial Committee for the Study of Trapping (Canada) 33

Fondouk Veterinary Hospital 19, 21–24, 26

Franklin Park Zoo 45–48

Great Britain 52

Humane Slaughter Act 21

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 15, 50

International Society for the Protection of Animals (ISPA) 24

Kilroy, \[father\] 1, 2, 5, 18, 26

Kilroy, \[mother\] 1, 2, 5, 6, 26

Kilroy, \[wife\] 26

laboratory animals 11–13

Larson, Sandi 17

law and legislation 11–18, 19–21, 28, 30–38, 40–45, 47–48

Lee, Carmen 52

Luke, Carter 45, 51

managing an organization 23

Massachusetts 7, 13, 15, 17, 20, 28–33, 35–37, 39, 41, 43, 54

Boston 11, 17, 25, 27, 45, 46

Franklin 11

Westport 27

Massachusetts Committee for Humane Trapping 33

Massachusetts Herpetological Society See New England Herpetological
Society

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)
1, 4, 7–9, 12, 16, 18–21, 24, 25, 27, 29–31, 38–40, 42, 45, 46, 49, 50,
53, 54

McGrail, John 31, 32

media 14, 25–26, 34, 35, 36–37, 39–40, 53

medicine/medical community 16–17

Metropolitan (Boston) District Commission 47, 48

Morocco 19, 21, 24

Fez 21

Moynihan, Neil 31

muskrats 35

New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS) 17

New England Herpetological Society 28

Operation Gwamba 24

overpopulation of animals 38–40

Peabody, Brown 31

pet shops 28, 29, 40–45, 54

poisoning animals 27

psychological aspects 4, 9–10, 18–19

public relations/outreach 34, 35, 36–37, 39–40

Question One \[anti-trapping initiative\] 37, 38

rodents 44

Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) 24

Schweitzer, Peter 31

Sheppard, Jim 32, 33

Silent Spring, 52

Smith, J. Robert 8

snakes 2, 3, 28–29, 44

spaying and neutering 3, 38–40

Surinam 24

They Take So Long To Die \[film\] 30, 34, 37

Trapper and Predator Caller 37

trapping 30–38

turtles 4, 10, 11

U.S. Department of the Interior 27

veterinary medicine 7, 8, 21, 22–23, 27, 40

violence towards animals and humans 11–18

Walter D. Stone Memorial Zoo 47

wildlife (in general) 30–38, 54

Wildlife Survival Project 31

women and animals 49–51

Yanarella, Warren 8

zoos 45–48
