---
---

This edited transcript is the product of a tape-recorded interview
conducted by Julia Miles with John F. Kullberg in Gaithersburg,
Maryland, on October 15, 2000 and January 7, 2001 for Recording Animal
Advocacy.

Audio for this interview is not available.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 - October 15, 2000

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

Early interest in the Christian Brothers; reasons for leaving them - The
importance of making one’s own decisions - Earning Bachelor’s and
Master’s degrees - Enrolling in doctoral program and teaching English in
community college - Serving as director of admissions at Columbia
University’s School of Law while writing doctoral dissertation.

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

Experiences with race and women’s issues as director of admissions -
Dissertation on “Law school information desired by prelaw students and
advisors. . . and its availability in the ‘Prelaw Handbook’” - Beginning
of interest in animal protection through sister’s work with Christine
Stevens; Stevens’ efforts to help animals; representing Animal Welfare
Institute (AWI) at a hearing in NY; attending meetings of the attorney
general’s committee on animal-related issues - Gretchen Wyler’s lawsuit
against the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals’
(ASPCA) board - Becoming an ASPCA board member - Functions and financial
situation of the ASPCA: going bankrupt in the early 1970s; gun carrying
privilege of officers; animal control responsibilities.

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

More on activities and finances of the ASPCA - Serving as acting
executive director at the ASPCA - Ending the organization’s use of
decompression chambers in 1978 and switching to sodium pentobarbital to
euthanize animals - Thirteen-year tenure as president of the ASPCA:
relationship with the board; mission of founder Henry Bergh; reflections
on his own role as president; reaching out to the public; spay/neuter
programs - Thoughts on cruelty to animals raised for food and on abuse
in society.

\[Tape 2, Side B\] . . . . .

More thoughts on abuse in society, on the need to understand the term
“animal rights,” on environmental abuse, on his becoming a vegetarian,
on humility and the need to keep learning - Friendship with Henry Spira;
involvement with and interests in the emerging

animal rights movement in the late 1970s - Negotiating animal control
contracts with New York City - The animal rights movement and its key
players: People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA); the animal
rights movement should be a peace movement; Alex Herschaft, his
conferences and his concern for farm animals.

\[Tape 3, Side A\] . . . . .

More on individuals in the animal rights movement: Alex Hershaft and
Henry Spira; Cleveland Amory; Merritt Clifton; Ingrid Newkirk; George
Cave; Sam LaBudde - Tenure as president of Guiding Eyes for the Blind;
responding to the Americans with Disabilities Act - Lobbying for
revision of dog license law which then allows the ASPCA to bid for
animal control, resulting in the city giving the ASPCA a significant
increase in the contract amount - Leaving the ASPCA because of
disagreement with some board members over animal rights philosophy;
negotiating sale of old ASPCA property and building of new headquarters
before leaving - Food choices of JK’s family members - Views on the
importance of ethics in society and the relationship between ethics and
religion - Being offered the position of executive director at the
Wildlife Land Trust; impressed by landowners who dedicate their
properties as permanent wildlife sanctuaries.

Session 2 - January 7, 2001

\[Tape 4, Side A\] . . . . .

Influence of family’s religious background; reflections on past work
experiences and professional opportunities, all centered on alleviating
abuse - Links between animal rights and other “rights” and peace based
efforts - Inviting Peter Singer to speak at the ASPCA; certain ASPCA
members not comfortable with no fur and only vegetarian food at events;
agreeing with George Cave’s views of the animal rights movement -
Disappointment with reception of Joint Resolutions for the 1990s by
Animal Protection Organizations by the Summit for the Animals,
especially Priscilla Feral’s objection to the resolution on
non-violence; positioning and infighting among animal groups.

\[Tape 4, Side B\] . . . . .

More on animal groups: Jim Mason; characteristics of the no-kill
community; Wayne Pacelle and Merritt Clifton - Discussions on animal
rights with Lloyd Tate, an African-American veterinarian - The
importance of “marches” and similar events in empowering and energizing
animal activists; the impact of letters to the editor - Admiration for
Henry Spira; antipathy between Spira and Elliot Katz; limited
interaction with Anne Herrington and Helen Jones - Disney and other
movies that encourage reverence for life; health and vegetarian
information in the media; the need to adopt a compassionate lifestyle;
wearing furs (real and fake) should be discouraged - Wildlife Land
Trust: the only land trust committed to never hunt, trap or harm wild
animals; the steps involved in obtaining conservation easements from
landowners; sanctuaries are in different parts of the world; raising
funds for and marketing the Trust.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

October 15, 2000

Gaithersburg, Maryland - Humane Society of the United States, Wildlife
Land Trust

Session of 3 hours

January 7, 2001

Gaithersburg, Maryland - Humane Society of the United States, Wildlife
Land Trust

Session of 1-1/2 hour

Interviewer:

Julie Miles (holder of master’s degree in forensic science;
photographer)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was substantially revised by Kullberg. Lee prepared
the introductory material and index, except for the biographical sketch
which was written by Kullberg.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

John Francis Kullberg was born in Cranston, Rhode Island on April 16,
1939. At the age of 16 he left home to become a member of a religious
teaching Order, which he left eight years later, just before he would
have had to permanently commit to the monastic vow of obedience, which
he believed conflicted with personal responsibility.

He received a bachelor of arts degree with a major in English literature
from The Catholic University of America (1962), a master of arts degree
with a major in English literature from the University of Rhode Island
(1967), and a doctor of education degree with a major in college and
university administration from Columbia University (1976). He also was a
graduate student at Manhattan College and the University of Illinois. He
was a teaching assistant while pursuing a master of arts degree at the
University of Rhode Island and was awarded a W. K. Kellogg Fellowship to
pursue doctoral studies at Columbia University’s Teachers College. In
1977 he was awarded a post-doctoral fellowship at the United States
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare to study federal support of
higher education.

He taught English literature and chaired English departments at St.
Raphael Academy (Pawtucket, Rhode Island, 1962-64) and Parkland College
(Champaign, Illinois, 1967-69). Representing the Baldridge Reading
Services he taught a multi- week course in reading and study skills at
several preparatory schools and colleges (1964-66). He also was director
of admissions and assistant dean of the Columbia University School of
Law (1970-77), president of the American Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (1978-91), and president of Guiding Eyes for the
Blind (1991-93). He currently is executive director of the Humane
Society of the United States Wildlife Land Trust (1994-present).

He has served on the boards of directors of the American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the American Humane Association, the
New York State Humane Association, and the National Coalition to Protect
Our Pets. He is currently a member of the boards of directors of the
Humane Society of the United States Wildlife Land Trust, the Farm Animal
Reform Movement, and the Society for Animal Protective Legislation. He
was board chairman of the National Coalition to Protect Our Pets and is
currently board president of the Society for Animal Protective
Legislation. He also is an advisor to the Food Animal Concerns Trust.

He is the author of The Communication Laboratory (the Dictaphone
Corporation, 1971), a teachers guide to using dictation equipment to
advance the language arts of reading, writing, listening, and speaking,
a program he pioneered while at Parkland College, and was retained by
the Dictaphone Corporation as a consultant to teachers and school
superintendents evaluating and introducing communication laboratory
instruction (1969-1972). He co-authored Women and the Law (CATALYST,
1974), a booklet for women interested in the legal profession, and was
the principal editor of The Animal Rights Handbook (The Living Planet
Press, 1990), a guide to compassionate lifestyles which sold more than
400,000 copies. He was executive producer of Where Have All The Dolphins
Gone, an award-winning television documentary on the cruelties involved
in purse-seine tuna fishing that was featured on the Discovery Channel
on Earth Day, 1989. He has authored several published articles,
including a New York Times Op-Ed essay that helped initiate a national
debate on how to fully and permanently fund the capital and operating
budgets of municipal animal shelters. He continues to promote
rights-related issues through television and radio interviews, published
letters, articles, and college lectures.

He has been honored by New York City’s Mid-Manhattan Chamber of Commerce
as their Man of the Year (1986), by Teachers College of Columbia
University as a Distinguished Alumnus (1992), and by the Pegasus
Foundation for Leadership in Habitat Preservation (2000).

He, his wife Karol, and their three children reside in Germantown,
Maryland.

Dr. John Kullberg

Session \#1

October 15, 2000

Gaithersburg, Maryland

Julia Miles, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Miles: Why don’t we just start with you telling me where and when you
were born and about your general childhood?

Kullberg: I was born on April 16, 1939, in Cranston, Rhode Island. My
parents decided I would be born at home. My father \[Paul\] had no
choice but to deliver me because the doctor was late in arriving. So my
coming into this world was truly a mother and father event. I’ve always
liked that caring scene of a mother pushing and a father encouraging and
receiving their shared and last offspring.

Miles: Did you have any siblings?

Kullberg: I have a brother, Warren, who’s an ordained Catholic priest
and several years older than me, and an older sister, Marjorie, who’s
long been active helping Christine Stevens, the Animal Welfare Institute
\[AWI\], and the Society for Animal Protective Legislation, non-profit
organizations founded by Christine. Marjorie is still an officer and a
member of the board of directors of AWI.

Miles: Did you grow up most of your life in Cranston?

Kullberg: I spent the first sixteen years of my life in Cranston. Near
my home was a cliff overlooking the main railroad tracks between Boston
and New York. While my childhood in Rhode Island was a happy time for
the most part, there was no question in my mind that I would leave Rhode
Island and go either to Boston or New York, and the high-speed trains I
regularly observed from that cliff reinforced that determination. The
place I finally decided upon was New York, but the choice was the result
of an opportunity more than anything else.

The way I left home was as principled and spiritually edifying for me as
it possibly could be. At fifteen years of age I decided I wanted to
become a member of a religious teaching order, the Brothers of the
Christian Schools. This French order traces its roots back to a
seventeenth-century saint, Jean-Baptist de La Salle, the Catholic
Church’s patron saint of teachers. This extraordinary man was an
advocate of classroom teaching rather than one-on-one tutorials, a
common sense change that now prevails throughout the world but was
revolutionary in his time. In truth, St. La Salle was an efficiency
expert, a trait I have always admired and practiced. My exposure to the
Christian Brothers would never have taken place had not my priest
brother convinced my parents that eight years of public school was
enough and that I should attend a Catholic high school. He was right.
The spiritual impact of the Catholic high school I attended, La Salle
Academy in Providence, Rhode Island, could not have been greater.

I fell in love with the religious idealism and academic commitment of
the Christian Brothers. They were appropriately pious. They were tough
but fair. They took no nonsense from anyone. They preached an expansive
spirituality that was very positive and attainable. I soon decided that
what I wanted to do with my life could best be done as a Christian
Brother. Fortunately, my parents allowed me to leave home at sixteen to
test my ideals. I began my junior year of high school at a place called
Saint Joseph’s Normal School in Barrytown, New York, a prep school for
future teachers (thus the “normal school” designation) along the banks
of the Hudson River where young men still in high school who wanted to
become Christian Brothers went to finish high school. In addition to
typical high school courses, we were given an early introduction into
what the religious life would be, following the religious guidelines of
the Rule of Saint Augustine for work and prayer in a monastic setting.

I thus finished high school and made my novitiate there. In Catholic
religious orders, a novitiate year precedes taking the temporary vows of
poverty, chastity, and obedience. The novitiate year encompasses long
periods of silence, prayer, spiritual reading, labor, exposure to
lectures and insights from older brothers in the order, and, in general,
evaluating and testing whether this is really the life you want to lead
forever. When you decide that you want to live such a life, you then
take vows for a limited period of time (e.g., five years) prior to
committing yourself permanently to the life of a religious teacher,
which is no small commitment for men or women at the start of their
adult lives.

This is relevant to some of the things we might want to touch on later,
particularly my growing appreciation of the importance of free will in
our lives, which led me to increasingly question the vow of obedience. I
agreed to take temporary vows at the end of my novitiate year. I then
attended various campuses of The Catholic University of America for my
undergraduate degree, with a major in English literature. My junior and
senior years were spent at the main campus of The Catholic University of
America in Washington, DC.

The truth is I never wanted to major in English literature. I had had a
horrendous time with an English teacher in seventh grade whom I felt
just did not understand me. That student-teacher mismatch resulted in a
course grade of D, a descent to the border of failure I had never
previously experienced. The D that she gave me I still believe was in
spite and was not because of my own reticence to work in her class. When
I was asked by the Christian Brothers to major in English literature,
that temporary vow of obedience was mightily tested for the first time.
When I agreed to this major, the quid pro quo was that I would be
allowed to study whatever I wanted for a graduate degree. In the late
1950s, what I really wanted to study was how the mass media affected and
shaped social values, an interest of mine that was heavily influenced by
several of Vance Packard’s books, but especially The Hidden
Persuaders.\[1\]

I received my bachelor’s degree in 1962. I then sought the promised
reward of graduate work in sociology but was told that the Order still
needed English teachers and that I should instead study for a master’s
degree in English literature. While I acquiesced and began studying for
an English graduate degree, this broken promise caused me to undertake a
careful reassessment of a vow that, in retrospect, I could never have
lived with peacefully. I could live with the vow of poverty because
basic food, shelter, and clothing needs were met, and most religious
priests, brothers, and nuns can live with the vow of chastity through a
spiritual commitment to avoid prurient interests. But when you commit to
the vow of obedience, you give to others the right to make decisions for
you that inevitably diminish your responsibility for what you do in
life.

In retrospect, my discomfort with the vow of obedience was appropriate.
Accepting responsibility for what we do with our lives (and don’t do) is
what protecting from abuse our environment and the sentient life it
contains is all about. As I see it, our life work should be about
understanding the implications of our life-style choices and then
striving to adapt our lifestyles to what is ethically appropriate, all
the while developing whatever talents we have in order to better
ourselves for employment opportunities and causes that interest us.

After college I taught for two years as a Christian Brother, chairing
the English department at Saint Raphael Academy in Pawtucket, Rhode
Island during my first year as a teacher. I had as many as fifty-five
young men in a class and as many as five classes a day. Despite this
workload, I still loved the Brothers. But increasingly I knew that the
vow of obedience was not for me and, in all honesty, nor was a career as
an English teacher. Understanding this, leaving the Christian Brothers,
while difficult, was a logical decision. I declined taking permanent
vows and left the Christian Brothers in mid-1964. Therein began, for me,
a period of personal and professional growth that was well served by the
spiritual and academic insights that I might never otherwise have had
had I not taken full advantage of the academic and professional
development opportunities the Christian Brothers made available to me
during the eight years I was associated with that Order.

Miles: What did your brother the priest think of your leaving?

Kullberg: Well, I certainly received and respected his good counsel when
I decided to become a Christian Brother. He was then a priest and
probably preferred that I would have become a Catholic priest. I
preferred the ministry to adolescents of the Christian Brothers and had
no interest in the priesthood. When I spoke to him about my leaving, my
recollection is that he was not discouraging. His respect for me was
supportive of any life-changing and life-affirming decision I would
make, although he made a good case for staying. I did not have a
brother, whom I admired and still admire tremendously, pushing me to go
in a direction that my intellectual and emotional insights as well as my
intuitive sense told me was no longer appropriate.

Miles: Where did you end up getting your master’s degree?

Kullberg: While admittedly an idealist, I was then and am still very
much a pragmatist when it comes to pursuing ideals, and that masters
degree was only a few courses away. Before explaining more about my
decision to complete a graduate degree in English literature, let me
digress to my father’s bout with obedience, for it always impressed me.
My father was the oldest son of a Swedish Congregationalist who
immigrated to the United States. My grandfather helped found the Swedish
Congregational Church in Providence, Rhode Island at the start of the
twentieth century and, for all practical purposes, was a minister,
although I don’t think he graduated from any seminary. My father decided
to marry a Catholic and he was disowned by his father for doing so. It
was a tremendously difficult time for him and his father, particularly
since my father was my grandfather’s oldest son.

Thus, I grew up in a family where religion — with a brother a priest and
a father who was the oldest son of a saintly but rigid father — early on
taught me by example that religious labels are not as important as how
well people live their lives. I would not have been able to say this so
simply when I was twenty and living the life of a scholarly religious
monk. But looking back, that was a seminal belief for me: spirituality
exists with many labels, and no one label has an exclusive path to what
is right and good. Similarly with this issue of English literature, once
it was my decision to get a master’s degree and not someone else’s, I
pragmatically thought, career-wise, that this would be the best thing
for me to do.

I recall that during my first visit to Europe in 1965, I traveled to
Elsinore, Denmark but arrived too early in the morning to be allowed
into the castle Shakespeare made famous in Hamlet. So I lay down on a
park bench at the start of a beautiful summer’s day, about seven or
eight o’clock in the morning, and came to terms with my need for more
formal education if I wanted to be more professionally prepared for
life-enhancing opportunities. What I was nearest to accomplishing was a
master’s degree in English literature. Being inspired by the beauty of
the Elsinore castle, I determined then that when I returned to the
United States I would make it my business to finish the master of arts
degree that I formerly never wanted.

But I had to make that decision, not someone else. Every day is a day of
decisions that we make and become responsible for, some minor, some
major, all of some importance to how our time on earth should be judged.

I finished the master’s degree at the University of Rhode Island and
then decided that my interest in sociology should be fulfilled by
getting into a communications/sociology program, possibly at the
University of Illinois. I had evaluated several universities as to where
I might best fulfill a sociology/communications doctoral program. The
best program I found was in Illinois.

I thus went to Champaign, Illinois in the summer of 1968 seeking
admission to fall classes for a graduate degree in communications. I was
quickly reminded that I was some eight months late in applying, since
students usually apply in the fall for the following fall. The
Department of Communications, therefore, had no interest in my
application at such a late date. I was counseled, however, to go over to
the Department of Journalism where the chairman, who was of Swedish
background, might take a special interest in my own Swedish background.
As improbable as this sounds, I arranged a meeting with him that,
indeed, was helpful. I registered in the Journalism Department and
started a doctoral program in journalism/communications in the fall of
1968, with the understanding that I would transfer to the Communications
Department in 1969.

While I was at the university I met, for want of a better description, a
secular saint, Professor Terry O’Banyon, who preached the idealism of a
then new wave of opportunity in American higher education that community
colleges represented. He was one of the prophets, if you will, a
philosophical resource for how and why community colleges should be
available to every citizen in every state. My initial interest in the
possibilities of community colleges came when I was informed that if I
were teaching in such a public institution I would not have to pay
tuition or fees at the university.

Within two miles of the University of Illinois was Parkland College, a
new Illinois public community college, which was just registering its
first classes. If I were teaching there, I’d earn a salary. I’d have no
university tuition or other expenses because this was then a benefit for
teaching within Illinois’ system of public education, and I could teach
as long as I wanted while matriculating for a doctorate. Luck and
opportunity had accompanied me to Illinois!

Thus, while matriculating at the university, my newly minted masters
degree helped me to become an English teacher at the new community
college. Wanting to learn more about the philosophy behind the community
college movement, I registered for a course with Terry O’Banyon and soon
became a convert to the community college movement. This extraordinary
academic movement provides life long, affordable education to anyone who
wanted college level studies as well as courses preparing students for
the demands of a college education. Such individuals come from any
economic strata, and from any race or background. In Florida, for
example, the legislation affecting community colleges was so liberal
that if four or five doctors wanted a special course in some very
research-oriented surgical procedure, then the nearest community college
had to provide that course and pay whatever costs that the typically
minuscule tuition did not cover. This liberal law was eventually
stricken, but it is an example of the idealism behind and affordability
of community colleges.

Having sought out a greater understanding of community college ideals
through the guidance offered by the man who was to become my first
college and university administration mentor, Terry O’Banyon, I was
asked within my first two months of teaching to become chairman of the
Department of English at Parkland College, even though most of the
teachers there had doctorates. Because of a nepotism rule at the
University of Illinois, husbands and wives with doctorates could not
teach in the same department. Often a husband and wife would both have
doctorates, say, in English literature. So one of them would have no
option but to teach elsewhere, while the other taught the same subject
at the university.

We had about fifteen English teachers at Parkland, and several had
doctorates. While I had only a master’s degree, my being asked by the
academic dean to become their chairman was not surprising because I
understood and believed in the ideals behind a community college
education than did most of my English department colleagues. Most of my
well educated staff would have preferred to be teaching at the
University of Illinois. Fortunately, Parkland’s academic dean was more
interested in having his faculty reflect those educational ideals that
were increasingly attractive to me. Part of my assignment was to nurture
the growth of these ideals within the English/communications faculties.

While I in many ways continued my interest in communications, I was
increasingly committed to post high school education and what its
low-cost availability could be to all people in the community. Young and
old who only took a course or two could say, “Yes, I’ve been to
college.” Their self-worth could only ascend, together with their
growing academic interests, and, as was often the case, so would their
ability to master technological skills that new community-based
industries and, consequently, new community-based employment
opportunities required.

I was liked by most of the teachers in my department in part because I
left the more esoteric courses to my Ph.D. staff, such as Shakespeare’s
tragedies, British lyric poetry, and American short stories. I chose the
courses that many with poor academic backgrounds needed most — English
as a second language and basic reading, writing, listening, and speaking
skills. I had some experience with study skill teaching because just
after I left the Christian Brothers I worked for two years for a firm
that offered a “How to Study” program to prep schools and colleges
throughout the country. It’s quite a marvelous opportunity to deal with
students who often lacked the most basic of study skills and teach them
how they could be their own best resource in mastering course work once
they knew how to study — and even speed-read. So I brought a course in
reading and study skills into the community college curriculum with some
impact. I would teach the grammar courses and the basic English courses
and enjoyed working with motivated students who appreciated very much
that they were going beyond the dead end some among them had experienced
in high school. Because of the academic many of these students had in
the past I also required these students to meet once a week in a group
setting with a social worker to explore their academic fears and
reinforce the reasons behind their academic successes.

For me, life has always been about being part of a cause. I don’t think
I could get up in the morning if I didn’t have a cause to pursue that
day. When I first went to a Catholic high school, I joined a club
called, believe it or not, The Fighting Sixty-Ninth, the reference being
to the sixth and ninth Commandments. My ongoing assignment was practiced
during the hour-and-a-half bus trip I would take to and from school each
day. When I heard other students demeaning women, for example, or using
foul language I would stand up and approach these guys, some a lot
bigger and tougher than me, to tell them that what they were doing was
wrong and they should cease and desist. “I would prefer, and certainly
the young ladies on the bus would prefer, that you stop,” I would say.
Most often they’d be more careful in their speech because it was
degrading and it was inappropriate and my speaking to them had something
of shock value. At other times I rightly feared reprisals, which
included being hit, sworn and laughed at, all simultaneously. Then I’d
go back to my seat and hope that when I got off the bus they would be
long gone. Some say if you make it in New York, you can make it
anywhere. For me, surviving those bus trips meant I could survive
anywhere!

I also became involved while in high school with something called the
Legion of Mary. I occasionally helped my mother with this. We’d go to
families that were having problems — alcoholism, spousal abandonment,
and so on. These interventions were assigned by our church. We’d sit
down and visit and pray together, and I would sometimes speak with some
of the kids in the family. My mother would do the work with the adults.
Or I would just be involved with saying communal prayers. Overall, our
goal was to help dysfunctional families become less dysfunctional. One
of the ironies in all of this was the fact that my father, late in life,
became an alcoholic. My mother’s ability to cope at home — and help me
cope — undoubtedly helped us better assist others with similar problems.
From my earliest days, that cause syndrome propelled me to become the
best I could be, as a Christian Brother, as a learner and academic, and
as an administrator. My father’s alcoholism also, early on, taught me
that abuse does not necessarily involve others. We also are obliged to
avoid abusing ourselves.

My decision to pursue a doctorate in higher education, an interest
nurtured by my work at Parkland College, attracted the attention of the
W. K. Kellogg Foundation, which resulted in my receiving a Kellogg
Fellowship in Higher Education at Columbia University’s Teachers
College. This was a prestigious and generous fellowship, and it
presented me with an opportunity I could not rationally refuse. My
childhood ambition to settle down in New York City was about to be
realized.

After finishing my course doctoral work, I needed time to complete a
dissertation. I became aware of an opportunity to become the director of
admissions at Columbia University’s School of Law. This was a good
opportunity for me because, among other pluses, being an employee of
Columbia University meant that my ongoing dissertation advising and
other graduate school fees would be waived. In addition to receiving a
fellowship to pursue doctoral studies, I became a Columbia College
resident hall counselor.

I was also receiving a monthly retainer payment from the Dictaphone
Corporation to simply be available to speak to faculties and school
boards about a dictation-assisted method of teaching the communication
skills of reading, writing, listening, and speaking that I pioneered
while at Parkland College. In addition to the retainer I received a
consultant fee for each day I spent discussing this program with others.
As a result I was as well-off financially while pursuing a doctorate as
I’ve ever been since, given my fellowship (no tuition, fees or book
costs), an appointment as a Columbia College residence hall counselor
(no apartment costs), and the Dictaphone retainer.

The cause that most attracted me to the illustrious Columbia University
School of Law had to do with the rumblings among blacks, Hispanics,
Asians, and women about the reality that law schools on the higher end
of the spectrum were simply reward places for male Anglo-Saxon graduates
of prestigious colleges, such as Princeton, Columbia, Yale, Harvard,
Stanford, and Chicago, the schools that were in turn fed by privileged
graduates of the most sought-after prep schools. These law school
graduates were offered employment with the best law firms as well as
prestigious court clerking opportunities, including clerking
opportunities at the Supreme Court.

I subsequently was offered and I accepted the position of law school
admissions director. I was soon thereafter given an opportunity to do
something about these rumblings about inequities, real and perceived,
from a supportive dean and faculty. On my admissions committee was Ruth
Bader Ginsburg, later to become a Supreme Court justice. She was very
encouraging of my interest in bringing a more diffuse population into
the law school. Many people have a false notion of law school admissions
decisions being made by a faculty that sits around a long table and
ponders every admission application. Not so. I had an extremely free
hand in deciding who was to be offered an invitation to matriculate at
Columbia Law School. That said, I could, when asked, objectively defend
every admissions decision, especially what those decisions were based
upon. In addition to good academic and leadership assets, I was also
making sure that the cultural, racial, and gender representations in
incoming classes were reflective of the percentages of applications we
were receiving from each of these groups, in and of itself a defensible
application of affirmative action.

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

I recall once being visited by a delegation of women from the Women’s
Law School Association. They wanted to meet with me because they felt
that women were underrepresented in incoming classes. Women then
comprised about forty percent of the class and forty percent of the
applicant pool. They wanted to know why was I favoring men, when “only”
forty percent of our admissions were women, not the fifty percent that
existed in our population generally. I explained to them that I analyzed
race and gender characteristics of applicants and what percent this was
of overall applicants. I would determine, for example, how many women
applied and what percent this number was of total applicants. I would
also analyze, to the best of my ability, how many blacks, Hispanics, and
Asians applied and, similarly, what percentage each of these groups were
of the overall applicant pool. There was an opportunity for blacks and
Hispanics to check off the optional “race” box, and most of these
applicants were doing that. My formula over seven years remained
constant: the ratios of acceptance by race and gender would reflect the
ratios of those populations in the applicant pool.

Thus, by attempting to be fair and right past wrongs, I had no option
but to be discriminatory. Now, given past inequities, most fair minded
individuals would agree that I was on the side of right, although those
who are upset by affirmative action, regardless of the reasons in favor
of it, would cross me off their list immediately as part of the problem.
When the women left, I looked forward to the next issue of the law
school student newspaper. The story on their meeting with me was under a
headline that really upset the woman who headed the women’s group. But
she also laughed while admitting to me that, “We can do nothing about
this.” The headline was, “No Discrimination in Admissions, Women Agree.”

If I were to take on anything new now by way of occupation, I would look
for a social cause that interested me and do whatever I could do to
advance that cause. And if I had every option to pick a different cause
today it probably would be to help people who stutter. I stuttered from
about the age of ten to sixteen. Its cause and remediation remain of
great interest to me.

For my dissertation I investigated the validity of the hypothesis that
students in college who wanted to be lawyers needed better information
about what was available to them to study and thus where to go. This was
a time when five thousand college students would apply for the three
hundred offers, give or take, that we needed to make to fill the one
hundred and ninety places in the Columbia Law School incoming class.
Similar applicant volumes existed at other prestigious law schools. One
of the reasons I was hired was because of my doctoral studies in higher
education and my multi-college experiences as a study skills counselor.
I thus had a very good understanding of the similarities and differences
among colleges throughout the country. My assignment was to find the
“gold” within the five thousand applicant pool that other prestigious
law schools might be overlooking, since many of our applicants applied
to most of these schools, and my seven-year tenure underscores my
overall success in fulfilling this assignment.

Listening to the complaints of many law school applicants helped me
focus on a useful dissertation topic. As I mentioned, it was my
observation that there was poor information about law schools available
to college students. Information available would include information
supplied by their pre-law advisors, by the law schools themselves when
responding to inquiries, and the compendium of law school information
that was supplied annually by the Educational Testing Service, in The
Pre-Law Handbook.

I was able to demonstrate that college juniors and seniors who wanted to
go to law school weren’t getting the information they needed to make
wise choices for their law school applications, and that law schools
were reticent to give out more helpful information, particularly those
that were not in the top echelon, because some of the information
embarrassed them. Their graduates weren’t getting jobs. Too many law
school graduates had little option but to work outside the field of law
because legal opportunities were insufficient. Many law schools didn’t
want to admit this. Some law schools were just too traditional for the
times. Clinical legal education was just becoming popular: if you wanted
to represent the poor in court, you need to become familiar with the
communities these people come from. Thus, as a student under the
immediate supervision of a professor it is important to work with legal
clients firsthand in so-called clinical settings in order to know
exactly how best to represent their interests and problems to the
judicial system.

I nationally surveyed both pre-law advisors and students and did content
analyses of the printed information law schools and the Educational
Testing Service were providing in order to prove that most pre-law
advisors, law schools, and the Educational Testing Service weren’t
providing enough information, in part because most pre-law advisors
weren’t asking for such information. Many college students were avoiding
their college pre-law advisors because they typically did not provide
useful responses to their questions and requests.

The Educational Testing Service actually took my dissertation results
and changed the way they collected information on law schools in the
future so that its annual compendium, The Pre-Law Handbook, would
thereafter contain more of the information that I had demonstrated
students and college pre-law advisors wanted and needed. Even my
dissertation became a cause, one that helped overcome an understandable
but inappropriate hesitancy on the part of many law schools to be
compared equally on a number of curriculum and career issues with other
law schools.

I completed all requirements for and thus was awarded a doctorate in
1977. I then needed to come to terms with the reality that I did not
want to be a law school admissions director forever. But what to do
next? Timing is often more compelling than planning. While considering
what my experience and academic attainments might best be focused on, a
logical conclusion was to celebrate the fact that I brought my community
college interest in educational opportunities for all into the law
school world by broadening racial and gender accessibility and, beyond
that, through the Educational Testing Service’s use of my dissertation,
to require from the universe of American law schools better information
for future law school applicants.

My pursuit of a community college presidency, a goal the Kellogg
Fellowship was designed to nurture, seemed the most logical next step.
But before I put this professional goal into motion I came upon a
post-doctoral fellowship opportunity at the United States Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare\[2\] that whetted my pragmatic interest
in studying ways to successfully access federal financial support for
higher education.

But first I should explain how, while still Columbia Law School’s
director of admissions, my interest in protecting animals from abuse
evolved. My sister, Marjorie Cooke, moved to Washington, DC from New
York City when her husband \[Charles\] was asked by J. Edgar Hoover to
be a lawyer for Federal Bureau of Investigation \[FBI\] agents who
believed that some of what their superiors asked them to do just might
be illegal. My brother-in-law, Charles Cooke, himself an FBI agent for
many years, parsed through their ethical and legal problems. If he said,
“Yes, you don’t have to do that because you could be legally at-risk and
thus professionally compromised,” they didn’t have to follow the orders
of their superiors. This assignment was principally the result of an
FBI-approved operation to steal the privileged papers of a psychiatrist
(Daniel Elsberg) that then became public. The agents carrying out the
operation were later identified by the New York Times and the Washington
Post. I mention this case to underscore what has long been a prime
ethical tenet of mine — promoting ethical conduct principally through an
understanding that good ends can never justify bad means, even for FBI
agents.

Thus, the genesis of why my sister, Marjorie Cooke, moved to Washington.
Marjorie became aware that Christine Stevens, the wife of the chairman
of the Kennedy Center, Roger Stevens, was looking for a social
secretary. Their meeting began a mutually supportive multi-year
relationship, personally and professionally, that still continues some
four and one-half decades later.

Christine Stevens was then and still is the reigning queen of the
American humane movement. This was back in the mid-1960s, when the
Laboratory Animal Welfare Act, which was principally drafted by
Christine Stevens, and whose Congressional sponsors were pretty much
chosen by her, became America’s first federal law protecting non-human
animals. Many humane organizations have taken credit for the passage of
this act, but Christine Stevens, more than anyone else, decided on its
content, its initial sponsors and made its passage happen. The fact that
her husband, Roger, was chairman of the board of directors of the
Kennedy Center helped. His role in political circles fed very well into
Christine’s interest in having access to the decision-makers, legally
and politically, whose interest could and did lead to better days for
many animals.

Thus, over the years, Christine has had tremendous influence in getting
better laws from Congress to diminish systemic animal cruelty. And
during her effort to attract congressional and senate sponsors and
ultimately to achieve passage of the Laboratory Animal Welfare Act, my
dear sister Marjorie, newly arrived in Washington, accepted Christine’s
invitation to be her social secretary and was at her side, lobbying
senators, congressmen, and their aides in order to draw attention to
animal abuse that could only be lessened through good federal laws
rigidly enforced.

Marjorie became very active in this and other important efforts
Christine undertook to reduce animal abuse. She continues to serve on
the board of directors of Christine’s Animal Welfare Institute.

As for Christine Stevens, we will never fully appreciate the
extraordinary level of influence she’s had. Christine is highly ethical
and of tremendous energy. Needy animals have never had a more devoted
and influential protector.

And what is the relevance of this to my life? One day, while I was still
at the law school, I received a call from Christine asking me, as
Marjorie’s brother, to do her a favor by agreeing to represent the
interests of the Animal Welfare Institute at a hearing called by the
then attorney general of New York State, Louis Lefkowitz, who was
looking into abuses involved with the interstate shipment of animals,
principally monkeys and puppies.

I was surprised that she wanted me to do this. My response, as best I
remember it, was “Christine, I’m a novice on matters to do with animal
welfare issues. I would do anything for you because I’ve come to be very
much an admirer of you and your work and my sister’s work with you, but
this is not a request I should accept. There must be someone else you
could ask to do this, because should I be asked a question, I would
probably not have any helpful answers.” In response she said, “I have
testimony already prepared that I want you to deliver, if you would, and
pictures to show. The attorney general will want the hearing to move
forward, and you probably wouldn’t get a single question. If you don’t
know the answer, say you’ll get back to him. But please, John, would you
do this?”

The moment I said yes was, on hindsight, a (and possibly the) defining
moment in my professional and personal life occurred. I gave the
testimony, showed the pictures, shook the attorney general’s hand and
left. No one asked me a question. I shipped the pictures back to
Christine and went back to matters at hand at the law school. This would
have been sometime in 1974. Two days after this hearing, as was usual
for me each morning, I skimmed the New York Times front-page headlines,
the editorial page, and then flipped through the rest. On page two in
the B section (state and metropolitan news) there was an
upper-left-hand-corner headline: “Attorney General Appoints Animal
Welfare Advisory Panel.” I said to myself, “Oh, this is the man I
testified before.” I then read the names of the animal protection
luminaries in New York City that he appointed to this committee: Max
Schnapp, Gretchen Wyler, Cleveland Amory — and John Kullberg! Without
ever being asked, I was appointed a member of a committee to advise the
attorney general on animal-related issues in New York State.

I called Christine Stevens and found myself apologizing to her. “I don’t
know how this could happen, Christine. At the very least I should have
been asked, and were I asked I would have declined the honor. Please get
in touch with the attorney general. This sounds like a good thing,
advising the attorney general, but you must find someone else.” Her
response tells you something about the drive and motivational abilities
of Christine Stevens. She said, “John, this is great news. I would be so
appreciative were you to at least attend the first couple of committee
meetings. If you decide it’s an absolute waste of time, then resign. But
if you would do me this favor,” she said, “this is a very important
opportunity to do something about the plight of so many animals that are
shipped through New York State to other destinations. Let me suggest to
you what you might do. Go to the first meeting. Bring a yellow pad. Take
copious notes. Don’t say anything. Think about what went on, go to at
least one more meeting and do the same. You will know when to speak.”
How could I then say no? This woman is not only a power broker on behalf
of animals, she is a delight. To please her is a treat. I was fully
charmed and intrigued by the strategy she laid out.

So I decided I would go forward with this charade she talked me into,
that of presenting myself as a knowledgeable resource for the attorney
general. Granted, I had some views on animals and had companion animals
at home, but that did not prepare me for this. Thinking back, however,
my years in a religious order, the issues of justice and ethics, my law
school experiences and the access I had to some terrific legal minds
there had prepared me to bring both common sense and some additional
insight to issues of right and wrong, regardless of the subject. A
professor, Louis Lusky, wrote a book while I was at the law school
called By What Right?.\[3\] That and Christine Stevens’ publication of
Animals and Their Legal Rights\[4\] had me well-primed in the mid-1970s
to understand the overall reality that all animals, human and non-human,
have a right not to be abused, and then do something about diminishing
and ending abuse whenever possible, an interest and commitment that to
this day remains constant.

I attended the first meeting of the attorney general’s new committee,
yellow pad in hand. Sure enough, at the second meeting I asked some
questions and continued taking notes. I went back to a third and fourth
meeting. I became increasingly interested in the discussions, the
disagreements, and the agreements. While doing this ostensibly as a
favor to Christine, I became very interested in justice issues affecting
animals. And while the law and drafting of bills was interesting to a
point, the bigger issue of animal abuse increasingly attracted my
attention.

Gretchen Wyler, a lounge singer and Broadway actress who now heads a
superb and much needed organization, the Ark Trust, which she founded,
was also a member of this committee. She was suing the American Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals \[ASPCA\] board of directors
for malfeasance. She was a member of the ASPCA’s board, and she could
sue through a provision in New York State’s not-for-profit law. It was
Gretchen Wyler’s opinion that some of that board’s directors had
exploitative interests in animals and these individuals were therefore
inappropriate choices as board members of an animal protection
organization. She believed that some of them had financial interests in
pharmaceutical companies that were engaged in exploitive animal
experimentation. Others were hunters. Gretchen also believed that some
of these same individuals were on the board because New York state law
then allowed ASPCA board members to carry guns without training. Many
demonstrated to Gretchen that their interests as to what the ASPCA could
do or should not do were clearly out of step with the ASPCA’s goal of
providing effective means for the prevention of cruelty to animals,
especially in New York City, albeit its founding mission statement
explicitly extended its range of interests throughout the United States.

Much of what the ASPCA was doing did not always pass muster as the most
humane way to fulfill its mission. Decompression chambers to end the
lives of unwanted and often injured dogs and cats were being used in its
five New York City shelters. These machines were designed to duplicate
what pilots experience when they fly too high in planes that are not
properly pressurized: they pass out and, if pressure is not restored,
they die. Those who recover almost always recall that they did not
experience pain. The majority of the board of directors at that time
believed that decompression was the only way that animals could be
humanely euthanized given the extraordinary volume of lost, injured,
abandoned and otherwise unwanted New York City-sourced animals the ASPCA
received each day (at its peak an average of three hundred). Thus, the
ASPCA had no option, given limited cage space, but to euthanize as many
as two hundred animals each day. Many witnesses of decompression
euthanasia believe the animals do suffer, however, if not from
decompression then from the way they were loaded into the decompression
chamber, which forced them to see the fear and death of their
companions.

Gretchen also felt that ASPCA efforts to spay-neuter adoptable animals
were insufficient, and efforts to find good homes for animals that were
turned in as unwanted were not sufficient, and, as a consequence, too
many former pets in need of new homes were being needlessly killed, as
well as being killed in the wrong way.

Gretchen Wyler asked me if my contacts at Columbia Law School could be
of help with her lawsuit. I did ask Benno Schmidt, who later became
president of Yale University, and who was then on the Columbia law
school faculty, to help Gretchen better evaluate the legal possibilities
of her lawsuit and give her some advice. What came of this I don’t know.
The ASPCA’s board of directors, however, soon thereafter wanted to
settle this lawsuit before it went to court. They did not want to get
into a protracted trial that might only embarrass them and further erode
the ASPCA’s already publicly smeared reputation.

The agreed-upon settlement had two major components: one, that new blood
would be brought on the board. To do this Gretchen was asked to nominate
twelve people for board appointments. The board would interview the
twelve and choose six. She also was to have some say in the choosing of
a new executive director.

Gretchen now had to come up with twelve names. Two of the twelve names
she came up with were David Dinkens, later to become mayor of New York
City, and John Kullberg, director of admissions and an assistant dean at
the Columbia University School of Law.

The board interviewed the twelve candidates she submitted, and they
chose six. I am certain I was chosen because, by the nature of my work,
I looked like a safe bet to support the established status quo. Frankly,
I didn’t want to become a board member. But I told Gretchen that if she
needed to come up with twelve names, she could use mine, in large part
because I did not believe at the time that they would choose me. But
when I was chosen, I thought, “Well, I don’t do a lot of community
service. Why not do something about this by joining the ASPCA board of
directors? We would meet only one or two days a month. Why not?”

Miles: This was what year?

Kullberg: This would have been 1975. While on the board, I learned more
about the ASPCA and was, for the most part, genuinely impressed with
what the ASPCA was doing. Also, my administrative background had been
increasingly refined through my doctoral interest in college and
university administration, which, in essence, was a graduate program in
not-for-profit management. I certainly could read corporate financial
reports and evaluate program goals and objectives. I was, in fact,
fairly savvy in these areas, as my doctorate suggests.

The reality was that the ASPCA was going bankrupt — no question about
it. It was in a horrendous state financially, and media coverage of
Gretchen’s lawsuit was not a help in that regard. A major problem was
that it was legally required by New York state law to provide animal
control services and collect dog license fees. In 1880 the ASPCA was
given income from dog licenses to meet animal control costs. But one
hundred years later these fees provided nowhere near the income needed
to meet the ASPCA’s real municipal program costs, and the ASPCA could
not raise dog license fees. It was losing over a million dollars every
year and only had, when I became a board member, about five million
dollars in reserve for future program responsibilities. During the two
years I was on the board, its financial reserves had diminished to
around \$3.5 million, principally because of annual losses from
municipal obligations, all of which its board believed it was legally
obliged to provide. The operating budget each year exceeded \$3 million.
So within two or three years, unless something truly extraordinary
happened to significantly reduce these annual losses, the ASPCA — this
founding humane society in the Western Hemisphere, the organizational
result of the brilliance and compassion of its founder, Henry Bergh,
would cease to exist. One of my claims to fame was rescuing the ASPCA
from bankruptcy and establishing it as one of the more financially sound
humane organizations in the country.

Miles: What was the ASPCA’s role in the humane movement. Did it only
function in New York City?

Kullberg: The ASPCA had animal cruelty law enforcement responsibilities
throughout New York State, which meant that its trained agents were
peace officers. As noted earlier, board members at the time of
Gretchen’s lawsuit and during my service as a board member, could carry
guns without training. All they had to do was to be elected to the board
of directors and raise their right hands to be sworn in as peace
officers by the president or chairman of the board. They would then
receive a badge and a permit that attested to their peace officer status
and consequent gun carrying right. Looking back, this was a very
dangerous state of affairs, but it was what it was then and what
continues today, with one important improvement that I helped bring
about, behind the scenes and without the board’s knowledge: to carry a
gun, a board member must now pass a test of the requisite laws and
annually pass a marksmanship test.

Miles: Just by being a member of the board?

Kullberg: Yes. They could then carry concealed weapons without training.
This had been going on since 1866. When Henry Bergh founded the ASPCA he
and his agents were allowed to carry guns because they were used as
euthanizing tools to end the suffering of downed horses. Bergh realized
that laws were very important to the future well being of his new
organization, so he secured the permission of the state legislature in
1866 to allow ASPCA officials to enforce those anti-cruelty statutes in
New York State that he himself had drafted. Not wanting to put a burden
on the then-existing police, the state legislature gave New York State
law enforcement powers to him and his agents. Board members designated
themselves law enforcement agents and this gun-carrying privilege thus
continues to this day.

When you think about this in terms of our sensitivity about gun carrying
today, this carry-over seems quite inappropriate. I was able to get the
state legislature to demand some training of all SPCA and SPCC
\[Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children\] peace officers
before and during the time they carry guns. Later the gun carrying
privilege was removed from SPCC officers but not from SPCA officers who,
I argued, needed guns, given the nature of their work. In successfully
arguing for this privileged responsibility for officers we hired and
trained, I had no political option at that time but to continue to
include SPCA board members. For SPCAs across the nation that were
modeled on the ASPCA, the issue of gun carrying by board members is
vigorously defended by their boards. That said, this board inclusion
usually serves no organizational purpose and is thus usually
inappropriate. The ASPCA board should lead the way in giving up this
right if for no other reason than for corporate liability
considerations.

While the ASPCA could enforce anti-cruelty statutes in New York State,
lack of enough paid agents to do this effectively meant that much animal
abuse was not adjudicated. The ASPCA also had animal control
responsibilities for the five boroughs of New York City, including the
rounding up of strays and accepting strays at their animal shelters
twenty-four hours a day. The city asked the ASPCA to pick up injured
animals from New York City, principally streets so that traffic wouldn’t
be inconvenienced. That was the primary municipal reason. The animals
were often in very bad condition and many were not treatable by the time
ASPCA ambulances brought them back to an ASPCA shelter. The ASPCA also
ran some humane education classes. Each shelter had an adoption center
and, in Manhattan, the ASPCA ran this country’s largest veterinary
hospital. When I went on the board of directors the shelters were in
horrendous shape, albeit a new one in Queens was being built because of
threats were it not built that were taken too seriously by the ASPCA
prior to my presidency by a demanding borough president, Donald Mannes.

\[End Tape 1, Side B; Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Kullberg: Another reason the board of the ASPCA decided to build a new
animal shelter in Queens was to have one shelter in every borough. They
thought the dog license law required this. I later determined that this
was an erroneous interpretation: the ASPCA was required to operate only
one shelter in exchange for its collecting and keeping dog license fees.
The ASPCA dog license department collected these fees, aided by ASPCA
license officers dressed like policemen, although they did not carry
guns. These officers knocked on doors all over the city demanding from
every dog owner a payment for a dog license.

Since net proceeds from this labor-intensive program were quite small
and the program itself was vastly insufficient as a means of funding
animal control responsibilities the ASPCA was trying its best to
provide, the ASPCA also ran an archaic direct mail program. Every
contributor’s name and address was on an index card. You could see that
these cards, which numbered no more than one thousand, were thumbed
through a lot. Oversight of this program was assigned to one woman who
sent out an appeal to those listed in this index card file only once a
year. The ASPCA actually lost money on this program when the salary paid
to the woman overseeing it was taken into account. Clearly,
twentieth-century fundraising techniques had not yet found their way to
the ASPCA!

Remarkably, although I was on the board, I was not appropriately aware
of many of the problems (other than overall fiduciary matters) that the
ASPCA was then facing. Autocratic executive directors are often experts
in keeping information from their boards. In saying this I, of course,
exclude myself!

I’ve always been impressed with this fact. Boards think they know what
an organization is doing. But if the executive director is devious, they
probably have insufficient and even incorrect information. Executive
directors do not like bringing bad news to their boards. They want to
keep their jobs, so they emphasize good news (even when there is not
much of it) and there is a natural tendency to keep the board in the
dark as much as possible concerning bad news.

Gretchen Wyler’s out of court settlement led to the appointment of a new
executive director who, unfortunately, turned out to be the wrong person
from several points of view, with a preponderance of unethical behavior
being the largest problem. I never would have supported him when I was
on the board had I known how unethical he was, professionally and
privately. The board’s then chairman, Louis Bishop, had no alternative
but to dismiss him in late 1977.

Miles: You were brought in together.

Kullberg: Essentially, yes. The new executive director was hired just
after I became a member of the board of directors in 1974.

Miles: What did your family think during this time when you were getting
more involved in animal issues?

Kullberg: I married Karol Marie Runing in late 1979. By 1966 my mother
and father had both passed away. So my closest friend and sibling was
then and, in addition to my wife, still is my sister, Marjorie Cooke.
Given her animal-centered interests in Washington, she was delighted
with my new career involvement with animals. She was, as I earlier
mentioned, actively involved in all manner of animal issues, attending
congressional and senate hearings in Washington and testifying on a
variety of animal-related bills. She has a great demeanor. You just have
to love her and like her. She looked good, she was good, and she could
be very dramatic when drama advanced her cause. She was of tremendous
assistance to Christine Stevens at a very important time in the
evolution of laws protecting animals, not just in the United States but
also globally — a reality, for example, when marine animal issues
arrived on the legislative scene. And she has always been of great
assistance and encouragement to me.

While on the ASPCA board of directors I was still assistant dean and
director of admissions at Columbia Law School. I subsequently finish my
doctoral dissertation, a challenging ordeal while working full-time.
More than two-thirds of doctoral candidates who begin doctoral course
work fail to complete their doctoral dissertations. At the very least I
can be credited with beating the odds!

As I noted earlier, in early 1977 I became aware of and eventually
accepted a post-doctoral fellowship opportunity at the United States
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare that would, I thought, help
advance my ongoing interest in becoming a college president by allowing
me, up close and personal, to study the process of obtaining federal
funding for college programs. All I had to do was participate in
governmental activities as a fellow and, in the process, learn what
makes government work and educational funding proposals successful.

I was assigned to Congressional Liaison within the Office of the
Secretary, who at that time was Joseph Califano. I would attend
congressional hearings and other meetings and submit a report on what
took place and my impressions. I regularly reported to an assistant
secretary who loved meetings but too often didn’t know much about the
subject being addressed at the meetings he chaired. Meetings were
helpful in acquainting him with information and varying points of view.
Bureaucrats love to meet. The greater the number of bureaucrats in
attendance, the more they seem to impress each other, a reality
reinforced later when I, as president of the ASPCA, was in contract
negotiations with the City of New York.

I quickly became politically disillusioned. New members of the House of
Representatives had to attend often meaningless hearings on
insignificant issues, often followed up by late-night receptions that
helped introduce them to power elites. Their families inevitably do not
join them. Thus spouses might see each other and their children every
other week or only once a month while they’re serving their country in
what I can only describe as in too often trivial ways. They have only
two years to get re-elected. Had holding federal office ever been of
interest to me, this exposure to the realities of government, at least
for new representatives, taught me that city, state, and national
politics was something that had definite drawbacks that I would be well
advised to avoid.

But I enjoyed my post-doctoral fellowship, tutoring myself on the
linkages between higher education and the federal government and
networking, always networking, with other fellows, political appointees,
and members of Congress and their staffs. I was still a member of the
board of directors of the ASPCA. I was about to write a resignation
letter to the chairman of the ASPCA board because I just couldn’t keep
running up to New York City every month; it was expensive and my
interests were increasingly elsewhere. Before I sent a resignation
letter, however, I contacted the then chairman of the board, Louis
Bishop, questioning why the executive director of the ASPCA, Duncan
Wright, had resigned. I also suggested that if they need someone to give
a month’s bridge to guide the ASPCA as an acting executive director, I
would consider such a request. Louis Bishop soon thereafter called and
surprised me by indeed asking me if I would return to New York City and
do a month’s bridge between the time of the firing of the executive
director Gretchen Wyler had recommended they hire and their completion
of a national search to hire a new one. He framed his request in such a
compelling way — you know, “Board members are expected to respond to
crises, and this is one. We need your help.”

So I took a month’s leave of absence from my fellowship, having just
moved into an apartment in Arlington, Virginia that overlooked the
Potomac River and the Washington, DC skyline — the ideal bachelors
apartment. It was an enjoyable time for me. The post-doctoral fellows
were a nice group to know. Women were also called fellows, by the way. I
was single and it was a good time socially.

I decided nonetheless to meet the challenge I helped engineer and Louis
Bishop took me up on. I arranged a month’s leave of absence from my
fellowship and became the ASPCA’s acting executive director on January
3, 1978. Upon my arrival I noticed that the executive director’s chair
had one wobbly leg. The office was dirty. In fact, the entire ASPCA
infrastructure was a mess and employee morale was not much better. The
ASPCA at that time was hugely dysfunctional.

I, to put it mildly, was overwhelmed in spite of my academic background
as a student of administration, my prior administrative experience, and
ASPCA board member orientation. I had to try to get a handle on who’s
who and who’s doing what and why and sometimes where. What quickly
became clear was that the ASPCA was a microcosm of everything I had been
theoretically involved with as a student of higher education. Education
is a nonprofit activity. So was the ASPCA. Education has labor problems.
There were two Teamster unions at the ASPCA. Education requires
significant community and donor public relations on the part of its
presidents. As acting ASPCA executive director, every time something out
of the ordinary happened to animals, especially in New York City,
newspaper reporters would want a statement from the head of the ASPCA
and television and radio reporters would show up with video cameras and
microphones. Believe me, there were daily public relations opportunities
at the ASPCA! Often the ASPCA was on the defensive for perceived and too
often real mistakes and omissions rather than creating opportunities to
underscore what we were doing right. You had to be an efficient
fund-raiser in higher education. If you can’t meet college income
expectations, you’re out. At the ASPCA more so, since it was going
bankrupt.

But the masochist in me grew to like my executive director appointment,
and one month became two. What I did in that first month was to study
every element of productive and non-productive ASPCA efforts — every
program, every person, every funding problem and opportunity. Until I
really understood the “hidden” side of the ASPCA I really wasn’t ready
to do anything dramatic to change the status quo during those early
days, except in one area.

I, as a board member, was frustrated that we were still using
decompression chambers to euthanize unadoptable, injured and sick
animals. I made it my business within the first month to break the chain
that tied us to decompression and move into what I hoped would have been
intravenous injections of sodium pentobarbital, which is still
considered the most humane way to end a dog’s and a cat’s life. I was
consulting with Dr. Herbert Rackow, who was formerly the pediatric
anesthesiologist at Columbia University’s Presbyterian Hospital. He was
very helpful in explaining what would render someone unconscious without
pain and what could look painless but was truly painful. But I was not
successful in getting, in the huge quantities we needed it, sodium
pentobarbital. So I either could postpone the decision to do away with
decompression chambers or I could take an intermediary step.

The only intermediary step available at that time was intravenous
injections of T-61, a liquid that was being marketed to shelters around
the country as an alternative to decompression chambers. T-61 did not
require the precise record-keeping the Food and Drug Administration
demanded of a drug such as sodium pentobarbital. You needed no special
government oversight with T-61 because humans couldn’t get high from it,
and if you can’t get high from it, the government isn’t interested.
Sodium pentobarbital was a different story. In its powder form I believe
it is called angel dust.

The problem with T-61 was that it froze involuntary muscles, a fact not
clear to me or to Dr. Rackow when I signed off on its use. We can
voluntarily control things with many of our muscles, but there are
muscles within us that we have no control over or very little control.
We can lower heartbeats and raise heartbeats, but we ultimately can’t
stop our hearts from beating by simply wishing this to happen. T-61
stopped hearts from beating. What it did was freeze lungs, heart, and
anything else that required involuntary muscles to function. Thus, those
injected with T-61 suffocated, and suffocation is a very painful death.
The body doesn’t necessarily show it, but it’s not humane. I think it’s
probably better than the way decompression was being done, with many
animals entering a decompression chamber at one time. I went with T-61
because I read the advertisements, and I wasn’t getting the contrary
advice I later received. T-61 was popular within the veterinary
community, and I also took that as additional evidence that it indeed
was humane.

Miles: Did you contact other shelters? Were they planning to use sodium
pentobarbital as well?

Kullberg: Some were, but none in anywhere near the quantity we were. We
were the granddaddy. When I first went to the ASPCA as acting executive
director, we were treating in our hospitals and shelters some 125,000
animals a year, over 90,000 of which were subject to euthanasia. Our
adoption programs were unsuccessful in giving them a timely chance of a
new beginning.

Miles: This was in 1978?

Kullberg: I started at the ASPCA on January 3, 1978. Because of this I
was only in Washington as an HEW fellow for about four months. I ended
the ASPCA’s use of decompression chambers by February 1, 1978.

After the first month I was able to phase in sodium pentobarbital as the
preferred substitute to T-61 because an ASPCA veterinarian, Dr. Norman
Johnson, whom I had developed a good and trusting friendship with,
supported me on this. Use of sodium pentobarbital required a
veterinarian’s approval, and we needed gallons because of the large
number of unwanted animals we were then receiving each day.
Decompression chambers were preferred by many shelter workers because
all they had to do was put animals in this machine and walk away. They
would then come back when the animals were dead. They did not get
intimately involved in their deaths. In contrast, an intravenous
injection requires someone to hold each animal. The veterinarian shaves
the front leg, finds the vein, puts the needle in and injects the
solution after which the animal quickly dies in the shelter worker’s
arms. At the ASPCA, with only nine hundred cages for the more than one
hundred thousand animals received each year, the volume of animals that
had to be euthanized was far greater than was the case anywhere else in
the country. But we showed that even in large volumes animals could die
painlessly and with dignity. Technicians holding animals for intravenous
injections of sodium pentobarbital quickly understood the humaneness and
the importance of their extraordinary role in ending lives painlessly.

There are three ways you can administer sodium pentobarbital. One was is
interperitoneally. Most individuals I have consulted consider this an
acceptable way. You can also inject directly into the heart. There are
those who would argue that’s okay, but most argue it’s not because of
the very real possibility, even probability of missing the heart. But no
one argues that administering sodium pentobarbital through the vein is
problematic. If you’re using the right solution, the right dose, and the
right needle, this is the most humane way a creature can die, human or
non-human.

We made our own sodium pentobarbital solutions in large batches, all the
time keeping careful records on volumes received, used and available. We
mixed our own solution because of the quantity needed and the savings
this represented over the commercially marketed solution. Everybody was
hyper about this, because if government oversight determined that even a
gram was unaccounted for, we might thereafter be temporarily forbidden
to manufacture its liquid form in the future. If large volumes were
unaccounted for, the prohibition could be permanent.

My lengthy review of the history behind the ASPCA’s use of sodium
pentobarbital should help put into better perspective why I was asked to
become president. My good reputation among ASPCA members initially was
based on my ability to change the way the ASPCA killed animals.

The ASPCA was required to hold a membership meeting every year, and in
1978 this annual meeting was held in early March. I was ready to return
to Washington, DC after the meeting in order to continue my fellowship
at HEW. I knew that at least I had achieved one important objective
during the two months preceding this meeting. The rest of the
institution was still in bad shape, but I better understood why and
could explain to the board and to whomever the board hired as executive
director what he or she needed to do if the ASPCA was to survive.

At this March annual meeting, the board chairman gave a report on the
search for a new executive director. He mentioned two or three people.
Suddenly the mother-in-law of the board’s treasurer, Susan Rosbach, a
very wealthy and outspoken woman, interrupted him. She was a no-nonsense
person whom most board members knew well and respected and didn’t want
to offend. She said, “I don’t care about you telling us the status of
the search you’re doing to find a new executive director. You have the
best executive director in recent memory right in this room. Have you
asked Dr. Kullberg to be the new executive director?” The chairman
responded by assuring her that the board was indeed very appreciative of
the work I had done, and he promised her that, in fact, he would discuss
with me my interest in staying on.

Following that meeting I was indeed asked to consider accepting the
position, thanks to Sue Rosbach. I’m not certain I would have been asked
without her challenge to the board. I think that my moving so quickly on
decommissioning the decompression chambers had some of the board
thinking I worked maybe a little too quickly for them. “Can this person
be controlled?” is always an issue of interest to a nonprofit board. If
some board members believe they might have a problem in this regard, the
object of their concern is usually considered no further. You can take
on the public when they are misinformed and do a lot of things to
advance your cause, but if your board isn’t behind you, fighting the
board is usually a useless effort. I say this as someone who has long
been a student of and participant in not-for-profit administration. No
matter how incompetent a board may be, the hired chief executive cannot
ultimately win in taking them on, at least not for long. There are
exceptions to this, but not many. In hindsight, I was one of those
exceptions, for I believe that board incompetence should be met head on,
something I have consistently done whenever principles are involved. I
also saw my work as a cause more than a job, and one takes more risks
for a cause. I have long believed that I would make a better founder
than a president.

In any event, I was given what was then a financial offer I couldn’t
easily refuse. I had to decide whether I would accept this professional
turn in my life to become a spokesperson for the American humane
movement, because that’s what this ASPCA position could be and should
be. At the ASPCA this spokesperson role had been ignored for years. At
the same time this position required taking on the extraordinary
challenges inherent in accepting law enforcement responsibilities
throughout New York State and the running of five animal shelters and
ambulance assisted animal control responsibilities in New York City
without the funding needed to sustain all of these important programs.
We also had adoptions, spay/neuter and education programs. We ran what
was then the nation’s fourth largest animal hospital and a shelter for
animals in transit at Kennedy International Airport. On top of that we
were responsible for collecting all of New York City’s dog license fees.

Henry Bergh, the ASPCA’s founder, established that organization to be a
vocal spokes-agency, if you will, for the American humane movement. In
running any organization looking back to the founding mission is an
essential exercise. The founding mission of the ASPCA was simple and
challenging: to provide effective means for the prevention of cruelty to
animals throughout the United States. I had to then look at the ASPCA
and say, “Why isn’t the ASPCA following this clear mission now?” My
self-appointed challenge was to restore the organization’s financial
health and reestablish its national voice, all the while nurturing its
many other programs to their humane potential.

During my sixteen-year tenure at the ASPCA I increased the endowment
ten-fold, built entirely new animal receiving, shelter and adoption
facilities in Manhattan, Queens, Staten Island, Brooklyn and the Bronx,
and increased our annual budget from \$4 million to \$20 million, while
consistently operating in the black. I also became a dedicated animal
rights promulgator, a reality that moved me, philosophically, far from
the understandings of a conservative board that was becoming
increasingly uncomfortable with what a truly compassionate lifestyle
requires and a president using the bully pulpit of the ASPCA to promote,
whenever possible, a commitment to compassionate living.

Bergh’s mission statement for the ASPCA is the best organizational
mission statement I’ve ever encountered: “Effective means” gives you a
broad mandate, but also a challenge to be more effective. “For the
prevention of cruelty to animals throughout the United States.” The
ASPCA was given a geographic focus by its founder that had long been
ignored. Most on the board believed the geographic limits to be New York
City. Nothing of note was being done throughout the United States. Nor
was the ASPCA attracting sufficient donor support in large part because
it did not even fund-raise nationally.

Overnight I de facto became a spokesperson for animal-related issues,
especially in the United States. I did not know just how I was going to
solve all of the problems then at the ASPCA, including its low regard in
the greater New York City community and its need for monies to more
effectively address its many funding-related problems, but I was
confident that, over time, things could only get better.

What I did to get some direction as to where I should go with the ASPCA
was to study the life and writings of Henry Bergh. I had access to his
early writings and the early board minutes that were taken in his quite
legible handwriting. These minutes disclosed his values and his vision.
We had moved away from Bergh’s vision in large part by becoming immersed
in the major hands on, time consuming problems around us.

Part of my attraction to the ASPCA was, on the one hand, my belief that
I could help turn this organization around from its spiritual and
financial woes and, on the other — and I’m serious when I say this — my
belief that I couldn’t make the place any worse. If it went bankrupt, if
everything fell apart, those who knew anything about the organization
knew that such an ending was inevitable anyway, and many who only heard
about our problems and not about our possibilities would say “good
riddance.” Simply put, I couldn’t be blamed for what, over many decades,
had happened to the ASPCA to make what should have been its very
prominent role in the American humane movement a rather feeble one.

While I believed I could make a difference, I also believed that I could
always go back to college administration. No one was going to blame me
for failing to halt a slide that many said couldn’t be halted, including
our auditors who, when they came to welcome me to the chief executive’s
chair, said, “John, you’ve got a couple of years. That’s it. It’s all
over in two years.”

So I had to become the pragmatist, the fund-raiser, an
astute-as-possible interventionist with the City of New York, taking
them on as an indefatigable leader of the ASPCA, excoriating city
leaders who dumped their animal-related problems on the ASPCA without
providing adequate funds, and effectively respond to their publicly
blaming the ASPCA for all of the city’s animal-related problems.

I also found it inappropriate for the ASPCA or any other humane society
to be a tax collector and set about trying to find a way to remove us
from that role. Some twenty ASPCA dog license officers dressed like
policemen knocked on apartment doors all over the five boroughs to
collect annual dog license fees, which the city and the state said we
could keep as our “reward” for accepting all of the city’s animal
control responsibilities. The problem was that it was very expensive to
send all these dog license agents around — and, frankly, dangerous. As
noted earlier, what they ultimately brought in, net of all costs, was
vastly insufficient for meeting our real costs for the so-called animal
control programs that the city believed they had us legally bound to do.
Yet they refused to say, “By the way, we will help you with your funding
problems. We will give you a contract for the real difference between
license fees and what it costs you to do our work,” because animal
control is, after all, the city’s work. The ASPCA and other humane
societies should be looking at how people and municipalities treat their
animals to make sure that whatever they do is being done properly and
humanely. But humane societies should not necessarily be the provider of
municipal services, particularly when, in so doing, they diminish their
ability to affirmatively and humanely speak out for all animals within
their jurisdictions, which, for the ASPCA, was from its inception
supposed to be the United States.

So I set about the task of saving the ASPCA. The efforts I preferred to
focus on were very much reduced by the reality of trying to, on the one
hand, stave off bankruptcy by pursuing national fund-raising
opportunities that I knew were there for us if we just did what we were
founded to do and fulfilled our responsibilities as well as possible
and, on the other hand, force the city to understand that it no longer
had an easily intimidated pushover running the ASPCA. It would have to
come to terms with true costs. If we weren’t getting needed funds we
would walk away from this work by returning it to the city and
thereafter be their harshest critic when municipal animal control
efforts were not being properly funded and properly carried out by them.
I, indeed, had to become all things to all people in running the ASPCA —
its promoter, defender, fixer, funder, cheerleader, and its national
leader.

Early on, I had to deal with a public perception that the ASPCA was a
place where animals were treated cruelly. The lawsuit brought by
Gretchen Wyler was predicated on painting a picture of a dysfunctional
ASPCA, an effort that was heavily followed by broadcast and print media,
and particularly by a weekly newspaper Our Town. Our Town’s audience was
the upper east side of New York City, where the ASPCA ran a veterinary
hospital, an animal shelter and had its administrative and humane
program offices, including my office. The community newspaper was owned,
editorialized and published by Ed Kayatt. Ed believed that all of
Gretchen’s complaints were valid, that the fellow who was there before
me did nothing to solve these problems other than to continue to ignore
them, as was also done by the executive director before him, and that
the board of directors of the ASPCA were truly malfeasant. Ed had the
bully pulpit of his newspaper to really put the ASPCA over the coals,
regularly and, at times, dramatically, with outrageous cartoons and
damning editorials.

I realized (and in hindsight, it’s good that I did) that in fulfilling
my need to reach the public I needed to be in direct contact with the
publisher of that paper, listen clearly to what his complaints were and
try to have him understand what our limits were as well as the changes
that were underway to make our work better. I was always open to hearing
better ways of doing something and ways we could work together with the
greater New York community to make the ASPCA more responsive to their
wishes and desires. I told him I needed his help to do this. As a quid
pro quo, I promised him full accessibility to the ASPCA’s programs,
policies, and problems. Over time, Ed became a supporter and friend.
Ignoring him would have been a disaster, and being anything less than
brutally honest with him would have been worse.

I initiated a monthly community meeting, which we advertised over the
radio and particularly on a daily talk radio program called “The Pageen
Fitzgerald Show.” Pageen was a champion of animal protection issues and
was very critical of the ASPCA. I sought opportunities to go on her
radio program, to take a lot of heat from her and her listeners, and
then try to respond honestly and respectfully to her and her call-in
listeners. Our monthly community meetings began at six o’clock in the
Gimbel’s department store community room, an upper east side site easily
accessible by subway. Gimbel’s had a large public meeting room. People
critical of the ASPCA could come and meet me and the ASPCA’s senior
program staff and, together, we would listen and attempt to work out
solutions to their complaints.

Twelve of my senior program staff were required to attend these
meetings. I began them by addressing some aspect of what we do. I would
then invite questions and comments on any aspect of our work from
whoever showed up. Sometimes there were ten people, and at other times
as many as a hundred and fifty people in attendance, depending on what
was happening at the ASPCA and to the city’s animals. Sometimes it was
very difficult to preserve a respectable decorum, especially when people
were screaming and shouting at me and others. But if a complaint was
made vis-à-vis a given program area, the person heading that program
area, after some comments I might make, was then brought to the
microphone to respond to the criticism. People working for me found that
if they couldn’t respond fairly and openly, they could well lose their
jobs. The ASPCA needed a strong and open staff. I would analyze my staff
when these questions were asked as to whether they were the people I
wanted or not. I let a lot of people go at the beginning — good people
in most instances but not possessing the skills that were needed to
effectively and humanely respond to the difficult realities of running
the nation’s largest shelter system. Many ASPCA shelters were in serious
need of repair and needed either to be fixed up or closed down, but I
expected all of our program efforts to nonetheless be first rate.

The demands on the ASPCA’s New York City shelters were great. Too many
animals were being euthanized, even after promoting a much greater
availability of free or low-cost spaying and neutering. We couldn’t do
spay/neuter at the point of adoption, although that was the ideal and a
goal. Over time we neutered males prior to their leaving the shelter
with their new caretakers, but spaying females prior to adoption
remained an exception. The hospital was old and these animals needed to
recover from the stresses they inevitably experienced in crowded
shelters, stresses that our veterinarians insisted could adversely
affect the outcome of a hospital procedure such as spaying. They needed
time in a calm and caring home environment prior to being subjected to
what in humans we call hysterectomies. This policy aggravated a lot of
good people in New York who just couldn’t understand why we postponed
these operations. But I went with the advice of our medical consultants
and staff and they were unanimous in discouraging pre-adoption spaying
as well as puppy and kitten spaying and neutering in our less than state
of the art surgical suites.

I was successful in attracting to an ASPCA-subsidized low cost
spay/neuter program members of the New York City veterinary community.
About 145 veterinarians throughout the city’s five boroughs provided
free or ASPCA-subsidized spay/neuters to the pets of people who adopted
animals from the ASPCA. We paid the veterinarians an agreed-upon
reimbursement. We told them that this was a great business opportunity
for them as well as an important service because they would then be the
first to see the new pet as a patient. Presumably the pet’s caretaker
would return for shots and check-ups. In essence, low cost or free
spaying and neutering was to be viewed as a loss leader for them. This
was an effective “carrot,” for veterinarians are also business people —
often too much so.

Little by little many beneficial changes took place. For about five
years I continued monthly community meetings. It was probably more
important than anything else I did to fulfill my commitment to
effectively and quickly address public complaints. Even over the
telephone we’d invite complainants to the face-to-face opportunity
community meetings provided.

I had both my idealism and pragmatism tested every day. My solace often
was, after a long day, to take one of the several volumes of Henry
Bergh’s hand written minutes of the ASPCA’s earliest board meetings and
read what he went through. He had a lot of difficulty with his board, by
the way, especially toward the end of his presidency, but he never
wavered from his principles. I learned at lot from him.

I soon set about nationalizing the ASPCA, in part to assist national
efforts to raise operating monies, but also to be true to our still in
effect mission statement. If nothing else, my doctoral studies impressed
in me a great appreciation for zero-based budgeting that was annually
tied into every program area. Long-term goals and annual measurable
objectives were established that would most effectively advance each
goal. Semi-annual staff evaluations principally involved ascertaining
just how effective and realistic the annualized objectives each staff
member agreed to for his or her program area. This system is a powerful
management tool if implemented effectively and monitored religiously.
Goals and objectives agreed upon to achieve these goals in large part
take the mystery out of semi-annual senior staff evaluations and
promotes partnerships between supervisors and those supervised.

We were dealing with more than one hundred thousand animals each year
not only in the animal shelters we ran in each borough, but also at an
“Animalport” at Kennedy International Airport. The Animalport provided R
and R for animals being shipped internationally and interstate. We also
opened a second veterinary hospital in our new Brooklyn shelter, a
location where veterinary services were needed most. Our role as
America’s largest humane society gave us a good start for a national
direct mail program, and by trial and error we found the right firm to
handle what became our major source of operating revenues. I proofread
everything that our direct mail facilitators prepared for potential and
existing donors. I was very careful about what we said about animal
issues in general, for in addition to promoting the ASPCA as America’s
first humane society these mailings also provided an opportunity to
advance the rationale of an inclusive animal-based ethic.

One time I put together what I then thought was the best direct mail
package I ever worked on. It was focused on animals raised and
sacrificed for food. The package was great in its presentation of
problems inherent in food animal rearing and, I believed, timely. We
used what I believed were the right pictures, the right tone, and the
right words. The financial return on this mailing, however, was among
our worst ever. Our donors just did not want to hear that lifestyle
choices that included eating meat and consuming dairy products supported
cruelty to animals. Until consumers say “no more,” these horrible
practices will continue. Meat and dairy products are produced on a
bottom line financial basis that seeks the cheapest way of getting the
animal-based product to consumers to then be sold at the highest profit
margin supply and demand analyses permitted. Not enough people are
saying “no more.” But maybe that mailing touched some hearts. Guilt,
over time, can work wonders.

Abuse is so endemic in our history and in our lives from our earliest
years. Consider, for example, the abuse encountered in the Old and New
Testaments. Jesus had to be whisked out of Bethlehem because Herod
ordered every male child killed when he heard about this newly-born
child who, he was told, was ordained to be King of the Jews. God ordered
Abraham to kill his son, a command He rescinded only when He determined
Abraham would actually do so. And God drowned all animal life other than
the pairs that joined Noah on the Ark. Other stories of fear and
suffering in the Old and New Testaments are held up as great models of
allegiance to God but often were also testaments to how abusive humans
can be and, if the writers of the Scriptures are to be believed, even
God can be. Consider also the many abuses that the Jews suffered during
their enslavement in Egypt and during their terrible experiences after
leaving Egypt. And, of course, there are the overwhelming abuses of our
own times that we reference as holocausts and ethnic cleansings.

\[End Tape 2, Side A; Begin Tape 2, Side B\]

Kullberg: Today our amusements involve computer-assisted games and World
Wrestling Federation television spectacles, both of which seem to
compete over just how much abuse they can depict. What do these games
and spectacles accomplish? They desensitize us from the real
consequences of abuse. In fantasy land those who are abused and killed
spring back to life. Not so in reality. They also desensitize us from
coming to terms with the many ways we abuse our environment. They
desensitize us from what goes on in the name of hunting, an activity
that, for many, glamorizes the killing of wild animals just for the
sport of it. They desensitize us to what goes on in the rearing of
animals for food. We are now so dramatically immersed in horror and
abuse in our entertainments that most among us are desensitized to
becoming upset when we learn what really happens to animals at factory
farms. Maybe the human species isn’t going to survive very much longer
because too many among us have become so indifferent to the many ways
humans abuse sentient life and the natural resources we and other
sentient species need to survive.

My ability to bring some perspective to cruelties uncovered by the ASPCA
and other sentinel humane organizations was aided by my having had the
experience of being a member of a religious order where care and concern
for each other (and sometimes all of God’s creation) were profound.
Inclusion of non-human animals within the sphere of care and concern for
other humans does not require a great leap. While much evil exists,
there is also much good within the universe of humans, and we should
work hard to tip the balance in favor of the good. Only by having
confidence in the goodness of most humans can we have any hope for the
future of our species.

Those who prefer the term “animal welfare” or “animal protection” to the
term “animal rights” increasingly disappoint me, and I’ll tell you why.
The term “animal rights” simply says that animals have a right not to be
abused. But we’ve allowed those who see animals only as profit
commodities to trivialize this term. Having to treat their animal
“commodities” better dissipates when cost benefit financial analyses
tell them that they’re not going to make as much money if they raise
them less cruelly. Many who have companion animals in their homes like
to be called their “masters.” This enslavement term supports a notion
that some sentient beings owned property, to do with as their masters
see fit. So you have to come to terms with whether or not you agree that
animals have rights. Animals don’t have a right to vote or a right to
drive a car. They do have a right not to be abused, and we should not
allow this quintessential right to be ridiculed and ignored, or a
slippery slope ensues. After all, the Nazis believed that Jews could be
abused, that their pain and suffering could be ignored and that their
protestations to the contrary could be ridiculed because, for them, only
some humans had a right not to be abused.

Men, women, children, blacks, Asians, Hispanics, gays, lesbians, the
elderly, the disabled, cows, pigs, dogs, cats — all sentient life share
an inalienable right not to be abused. So if “animal rights” bothers you
as a term, you need to address why it does. The animal rights movement
is the umbrella movement of all rights movements, and this fact needs to
be better understood if the human and non-human survival implications of
truly compassionate lifestyles are to become the standard rather than
the exception. At stake is the future well being of all animal species,
including our own.

It’s important to understand that what’s abusive to one species may not
be abusive to another. There are differences in what is or is not
abusive even among members of the same species. What is abusive to
infants may not be abusive to adults. But we can agree on areas where we
are all abused as human beings by the system we live in or by the family
group, dysfunctional or not, that we are bound to. What is abusive to a
cow? Consider the way they are treated and reared. Is any systemic abuse
evident and permissible? Not when those affected feel pain and suffer.
What is abusive to a calf? Rearing calves in narrow stalls where they
can’t turn around forces them to stand and settle in their own feces for
their entire lives. They’re fed an antibiotic-laden liquid diet to keep
their flesh pale. Calves have the same right not to be abused as we
have. If we’re not willing to admit this, how can truly compassionate
lifestyles ever be common?

Well into my time at the ASPCA I saw that the differentiation between
the animal rights movement and the animal welfare movement was
ridiculous. Understanding what animal rights means helps us to better
understand why the success of a well thought out environmental movement
is inseparably bound to the success of the animal rights movement. While
environmentalists need us to consistently point this out, we need to
make sure we understand the environmentalists agenda of protecting
biodiversity and the resources sentient and, as best we know,
non-sentient life cannot live without. To pollute my water, desertify my
soil, or diminish the quality of my air is to be abusive to me and to
all other animals whose well-being depends on pure water, productive
soil and clean air.

If I am fouling the air and the water, polluting it, and desertifying
the land, or experimenting with genetic manipulations in the harvest, or
spraying DDT — which still goes on in many countries that now trade the
United States — I am aggressively abusing myself, my family, and other
animals. There have been several stories in the news recently about
lawyers taking on companies whose release of carcinogenic chemicals into
common water supplies has caused significant increases in cancer in
nearby communities — clear cases of industries abusing their neighbors
by abusing needed natural resources. We and all other sentient life
forms have a right not to be abused and, by its response to abuse, so
does our biosphere and the life sustaining resources that it contains.

If we really haven’t bought into the philosophy of animal rights, how
can we be expected to quickly and effectively reverse the consequences
of our past and present insensitive and selfish actions. If we don’t
effectively address the causes of abuse, I don’t see our
soon-to-be-doubled population surviving. I think that the generation I
represent will not be looked upon with much respect by those who follow
us, and for good reason. Because of our endemic denial abilities and
carpe diem preferences we have entered a period during which, because of
abuses that we continue to tolerate, we could very well eradicate
ourselves.

We have to be true to our personal beliefs and standards. We have to
live in ways that are compassionately integrated with our choices in
life, choices in clothing, choices in entertainment, choices in food,
and choices in where we live.

My great fortune in life has been to understand the importance of the
animal rights movement and to have this understanding affect my choices
in life. After I left the ASPCA in 1991, I became president of a guide
dog school and I will comment on that later. But given my environmental
comments I first want to reflect on my tenure as executive director of
the Wildlife Land Trust, which began in 1994 and continues. We will go
anywhere on earth to arrange for the permanent protection of sanctuary
land. This land can be either donated to us in fee simple title or
protected through a donated conservation easement. A conservation
easement is consummated in a document in which the owner contractually
relinquishes some of the rights he has as a landowner. The consequent
contract is binding on all future owners of his or her property. And the
rights we ask the owner to give up include further development,
commercial logging, and recreational and commercial hunting and
trapping. The land thereafter is dedicated as a true and permanent
sanctuary for wild animals.

During our lives we should do all we can to protect sentient life from
abuse. My professional involvement with environmental protection is the
inclusive extension of an animal rights philosophy. What does saving
land have to do with abuse? The United Nations study that found that
half of the world’s wetlands and half of the world’s forests that
existed at the beginning of the twentieth century no longer exist, and
two-thirds of the world’s agricultural lands are in various stages of
desertification, losses that took place when our worldwide human
population was significantly less than the 6.5 billion it is now and the
10-13 billion it may be within fifty years. This means that many within
our human and non-human species are now suffering and dying and many
more will suffer in the future because our air is missing half of the
beneficial effects of photosynthesis it had one hundred years ago, soils
that once produced abundant food now often can produce none or only
severely limited harvests of a narrow spectrum of the grains, fruits and
vegetables they one did in the past, and wetland protected water
supplies are now half of what they were before. Indeed our most brutal
social battles in the foreseeable future may be over water rights and
fertile soils.

While natural events destroyed some of these wetlands, forests and
soils, this destruction was principally due to humans seizing, wasting
and otherwise manipulating and destroying natural resources. These
disheartening losses continue as each new member of our increasing human
population wants and expects more of our fragile and finite natural
resources.

Unless most humans change from lifestyle choices that abuse the
environment and those who live within it to more compassionately
informed choices that protect and enhance natural environments and the
life forms they support, we can’t and shouldn’t expect to survive as the
dominant species we now are. Despite the knowledge we now have of just
how badly our earth stewardship was in the twentieth century, our
worldwide natural resource stewardship has yet to dramatically improve.
In the United States, where twenty-five percent of globally accessed
natural resources are consumed each year, the environmental protection
treaty that most other countries committed their industries and citizens
to just a few years back (the Kyoto Treaty) is yet to be signed because
our politicians believe that its provisions would be a burden to
existing American lifestyles (i.e. American voter lifestyles). This is
analogous to telling a man with severe heart trouble who used to be a
weight lifter and marathon runner to continue to lift weights and run
marathons and stop worrying about his heart. And we still have people
with significant political influence arguing, in the face of enormous
evidence to the contrary, that there is no global warming to be
concerned about.

When I’ve mentioned the loss in the twentieth century of fifty percent
of our worldwide wetlands and forests to people whom I know to be caring
people, they typically change the subject. Their lack of interest in
pursuing the implications of these staggering losses can’t always be
because they don’t believe me. These are not my findings, nor the Sierra
Club’s, nor the findings of Greenpeace. This data comes from a carefully
documented United Nation’s study that was funded, reviewed and jointly
published by the World Bank and the United Nations. I think we are so
desensitized to personal and environmental abuse from exposures we’ve
had through media, from kill-focused computerized games that now
constitutes family entertainment and from other exposures and
entertainments that indifference to alarming information such as this is
becoming increasingly common. Some speak a good line about protecting
life-dependent resources, but their actions and defenses betray a
different standard. And this is bad news for all of us, but particularly
for those who follow us.

Many years before I became a vegetarian, I well knew the ethical
importance of basing my food choices on a vegetarian diet and, better
yet, a sensible vegan diet. But on hindsight I wasn’t mentally ready to
accept the inconveniences that I incorrectly perceived such a change in
my food choices would require. While I certainly wouldn’t eat any veal
from the first day I heard about the horrors of raising veal calves, I
didn’t philosophically put my beliefs and food choices together and
become a practicing vegetarian until 1988. I understand the ethical
reasons behind a vegan diet, but I’ve equivocated on basing all of my
food choices on a vegan diet because of personal health issues. My
doctors tell me I should avoid eating soy. You live off soy when you
become vegan! I now occasionally have fish, shrimp and shellfish in
order to ingest some of the protein my health needs require. I know
there are problems with how fish are caught and how farms operate. I’m
aware of the suffering that takes place when fish harvested by nets and
hooks are left to suffocate, as well as the species depletions many of
these harvests increasingly represent. Thus, if the past is prologue to
the future, I should ingest fish less soon, so that “occasionally”
becomes “rarely” and then “never,” despite my particular medical advice
to the contrary.

What’s going to happen is I’ll probably die from mercury and dioxin
poisoning, which would be absolutely fair. Eat ocean and lake-caught
fish and you’ve also probably ingested a dollop of dioxin, mercury and
several other poisons with each bite. Some fish are more dangerous in
this regard than others. We’ve fouled our oceans, rivers, lakes and
streams so much that we can no longer safely consume the food sources
they contain, over and above the ethics involved in eating fish and
other ocean, lake and river-harvested sentient life foods at all. And
what about the ethics of serving poisoned fish products to others? I
mention the foregoing only to underscore the destructive core within
each of us, including, sadly, those who know better, including myself.
Knowledge and ethical insights often only slowly lead us to life
enhancing decisions.

It took me ten years into my term as president of the ASPCA, then
America’s largest humane society, to become a vegetarian. I try not to
judge individuals who defer making inconvenient lifestyle changes that
they know they should make, albeit I will continue to pass judgment on
our species generally, a species being destroyed by indifference, denial
and weak wills. I am not the role model I should be. But I do make a
daily effort to practice the ideal and do that which is ethically
consistent with what I know and believe to be right. Like a recovering
addict, it is always one day at a time until our more ethical choices
become routine. Then lifestyle choices that involve abuse become
abhorrent. But we are running out of time to make a difference.
Deferring life enhancing lifestyle changes is one option we no longer
have if we truly care about what our joined choices are doing to others
and to our environment.

To him or her who is given much, much is expected. From my earliest
exposures to and reflections on abuse to what now daily passes through
my desk or daily comes to my attention through newspapers, television
and public radio, I have been exposed to horrific but factually accurate
information about animal suffering on factory farms, in laboratories, in
the wild, as pets, when used for work purposes, and/or for exhibition
(e.g. in circuses), or in other settings that can still surprise us with
their capacities to harm. And yet it took me several years to conform
most of my actions to my knowledge, and thus pass Gandhi’s test of
ethical consistency, “We must be the change we wish to see in the
world.” Now, thirteen years after becoming a vegetarian, when I finally
decided to become a vegan, my doctors say, “Well, John, not so fast,”
and I listen. I probably should have a good heart-to-heart with a doctor
I truly admire, Neil Barnard, founder and president of the Physicians
Committee for Responsible Medicine \[PCRM\].

While being a lifelong advocate of the importance of an ethical
philosophy based primarily on non-violence, a commitment that must
embrace all of our daily choices, including our clothing and food
choices, I have also confronted in my own life some of the barriers to
living this ideal to its fullest. And if it took me so many years to
practice with predictable consistency what’s ethically correct in my
consumer choices, how are we going to get our worldwide populations to
turn away from violence-sourced foods and consumer products in a time
frame of months or at best, within a few years? Mad cow disease is but
one indication that if there isn’t a strong, ethically based turnaround
from our dependence on animals for food, in this instance the billions
of pounds of animal flesh humans and their pets annually consume, we may
well be sowing the seeds of annihilation by prions, as well as viruses
and bacteria. Since we have no need to subject animals to cruelty so
that more of us can eat them and otherwise consume the products they
produce, given the non animal-based alternatives that are so readily
available to us, it indeed may be our turn to suffer, species-wide, and
become as extinct as our evolutionary forbears.

Consider for a moment the Gaia concept of Earth as creation’s Mother. In
self-defense she may indeed soon say to us “Continue eating the food
that is going to sicken you and drinking the water your indifference has
allowed to become polluted. Breathe the air your lungs can no longer
ingest without harm. I’ll throw in a few viruses on top of the effects
of those bacteria and prions that your immune system can’t protect you
from. Frankly, on behalf of the other life forms I support, good
riddance.”

What may be inevitable in this regard and quite possibly in the near
future, is biological warfare on massive scales. There is evidence that
biological warfare was attempted by Iraq in the 1990s during the Desert
Storm war. It’s not indicative of a good future for us when irrational,
grudge-driven leaders of countries such as Iraq develop biological
warfare as an ever more potent way to hasten our demise as a dominant
species, a demise that many now see as inevitable in any event because
of the increasingly evident negative consequences of the lifestyle
choices we apparently have locked ourselves onto. At issue are the
delivery systems, and consuming animal flesh and animal-based products
could well be the most potent and least discriminating delivery system
of all.

One of the shapers of the American humane movement, especially during
the later half of the twentieth century, has been Michael Fox, a friend
whose writings I have long appreciated. In the 1980s he wrote an
important work documenting the extent and implications of animal abuse.
His Returning to Eden\[5\] is a reference that I believe everyone would
do well to read and consult. Although written some twenty years ago, its
philosophical underpinnings remain constant and its concerns prescient.
If you were to listen to Michael Fox give a speech now you would find
him considerably more disheartened than when he wrote that book, in
large part, I assume, because his warnings have not led to the policy
and lifestyle changes he then advocated. He’s a savvy scholar who will
increasingly be seen as such when more cause–effect negatives he and
others are bringing to our attention become more obvious to a public
majority that, for the most part, will probably resist responding to in
any event, until its too late.

Miles: While you were at the ASPCA and you were becoming aware of issues
involving animals other that dogs and cats, how were they brought to
your attention in your role as an executive director? I understand you
had an issue involving farm animals. Or was it just in reading about
these issues?

Kullberg: I think that most administrators who become chief executive
and chief operating officers run the risk of inflated egos because when
boards of directors choose them, they believe their boards must
assuredly recognize in them the brilliance and ability they are all too
ready to believe they truly must have to be chosen to take over the
banner of their organization’s mission. And if they solve outstanding
problems quickly boards typically give them political leverage and less
interference when addressing future problems, further inflating their
egos. I confess to having experienced some such ego inflation in my
past! But we should never stop growing and my growth in the animal
rights movement evolved through access to other leaders, authors, media
sources and through listening to those most informed among our
constituents.

Maybe because of my several years experience as a member of a religious
order, some of the excessive ego (we all have some helpful ego) I
otherwise would have was somewhat depleted on arrival. We used to have a
practice every Friday evening that required each member of the religious
community to go to the front of the room in which we were assembled and
kneel down. We would then ask our confreres to publicly bring to our
attention our shortcomings. This exercise was called “advertisements.”
We often referred to it as “shots.” We would kneel down and say
something akin to the following: “Dear brothers, I know that there are
things that I do that are upsetting to some or many of you, and I would
like to improve my life. So I sincerely ask you, in the spirit of great
humility, to please let me know how I should improve myself to be a more
appropriate and properly consistent person for the religious life I have
chosen to live.” Then, with your back to the community you just
addressed, you would listen to what changes in behavior others would
like to see in you. So someone would stand up and say something that
could be significant and often embarrassing. “Advertisers” would always
address you in the plural, so that they would be perceived as being a
potential example of the defect they see in your behavior.

One of the better advertisements I received was when a brother said, “It
seems to me, my dear Brother John, that we bite our nails.” So now the
whole community was informed that I somehow was biting nails that I
shared with another person! Obviously we became accustomed to living a
life of humility that did not sustain oversized egos.

I think one of the positives in my becoming president of the ASPCA was
to admit, to myself and others, that even with a doctorate in college
and university administration from as prestigious an institution as
Columbia University I still had a lot to learn. I would try to be true
to my values and commitments to honesty, responsibility, respect,
accountability and, increasingly, compassion for all life forms and
empathy with many (a lifetime effort still far short of where I wish to
be) and reverence for life as best exemplified by \[Albert\] Schweitzer,
and I would try to be open to the observations and concerns of others. I
think my decision, early on, to hold public community meetings every
month was helpful in this regard. Were I easily hurt by public
complaints I wouldn’t have lasted through even one of those meetings.
“Enough! I don’t have to hear this. Go away. Leave me alone. End this.”
But I didn’t react that way. I think that spirit of wanting to learn
from what others would publicly say, regardless of how they said it, was
very helpful and, in part, my religious experiences helped to prepare me
for this. New Yorkers, and especially New York animal people can be very
insulting when saying things that can also be very right. By being open
with and available to the animal-related concerns of others within the
immediate community we served, I quickly became more in touch with the
universe of advocacy issues the public wanted the ASPCA to at least take
a position on as well as the specific standards of animal care the
public expected and demanded, particularly from as important an
organization as America’s founding humane society.

One of the early ways openness was helpful was dealing with occasional
demonstrations against what the ASPCA allegedly was or was not doing.
One of the first demonstrations I went to was about the ASPCA’s
decompression chambers. People didn’t know yet that I was taking steps
to get rid of them. A fellow named Henry Spira, who was to become a
close friend, called for a demonstration on a mid-winter Saturday in
1978 to demand that the ASPCA change from decompression chambers to
something that would be more humane for animals that, either because of
health reasons or through nobody wanting them, had to be euthanized in
order to make room for new unwanted, sick and/or lost animals. When I
took over the ASPCA in 1978 we were receiving more than one hundred
thousand unwanted or lost animals a year from a five-borough city of
more than seven million people. We had a total of fifteen hundred cage
spaces. Obviously we had no option but to euthanize most of these
animals to make room for the three hundred to four hundred we took in,
on average, every day.

When told that there was a demonstration underway in front of the upper
east side building that housed the ASPCA’s Manhattan (New York City)
animal shelter, veterinary hospital and executive offices, I immediately
left my apartment some eight blocks away to attend. Everybody was
screaming. I, in a loud voice, introduce myself as the acting head of
the ASPCA. Then everybody starts screaming at me, “Who cares! We know
what you’re up to. You’re part of the problem too.” I then told the
demonstrators that I had some good news. “If you would like to come
inside and meet with me to discuss your concerns, I’d be happy to do
that. I’m going to go inside and I’m going to go downstairs to our
education classroom. I’m going to sit at a large conference table. I’ll
sit there and do some reading for an hour or two if necessary. When you
finish your demonstration, if any of you would like to talk with me
without shouting, I’ll be available to listen and share some news about
what we’re trying to do about decompression chambers.” I then start
walking toward the front door of the ASPCA building to go to the
education classroom.

Before I went inside, Henry Spira came to me and said, “I’m going to
need about another half-hour for this demonstration to run its course.
Then I’m going to come down and sit with you, and some people will come
down with me. Thank you for inviting us to do this.” That was the
beginning of my good relationship with Henry Spira. When some of the
people who joined Henry and sat down with me would raise their voices,
Henry would quiet them down. The meeting lasted about an hour and ended
amicably, particularly because I was already aware of and was starting
to address most of the problems that they brought to my attention.

Those demonstrators loved Henry because over many months of Saturday
demonstrations that he had organized at the Museum of Natural History
forced that institution to end demonstrably cruel cat sex studies that
required the experimenters to blind many cats. He publicly shamed the
museum and they begrudgingly ended these strange experiments. This was
his first animal-focused effort. Henry was a former maritime union
leader and merchant seaman and had just retired as a history teacher
from the New York City public school system. Most importantly, he was a
compassionate individual who understood that more had to be done to help
animals humans victimized. He was significantly influenced by Peter
Singer’s Animal Liberation and, later, Tom Regan’s The Case for Animal
Rights.\[6\] Through people like my dear sister, Marjorie Cooke,
Christine Stevens, Henry Spira and authors such as Singer, Fox and Regan
and Animals and Their Legal Rights that Christine published in the
1950s, my understanding of the broad reach of animals in need of our
protection from humans whose lifestyles, amusements and employment
depended upon animal abuse grew quickly, as did my frustration with the
slow pace of much needed change.

Henry Spira was a student of how to bring people together for a cause.
He also worked a crowd very well. He learned from his union days how to
effectively organize people. He was also a socialist and, probably, was
once a communist. He once recommended that I stop saying that the end
doesn’t justify the means. “That’s complicated, John. It’s better that
you don’t get into that.” That would be consistent with a communist
ideology. But I liked Henry, despite this fundamental ethical
disagreement. He was effective, honest, and had good organizational
instincts.

Miles: Was he instrumental in opening your eyes to other issues
involving animals?

Kullberg: To a degree, but I was on a fast learning curve when, several
years prior to meeting Henry, I was involved with an animal cruelty
advisory committee and went on the ASPCA board. Many were contributing
to the burgeoning animal rights movement of the late 1970s. Henry was
especially helpful with laying out effective tactics to ultimately win
victories for animals, proposing joint ventures and, over the years,
encouraging me to hold on to the bully pulpit that the ASPCA provided.

I had access to limited ASPCA monies that I distributed each year to a
given humane leader or grass roots organization when I believed the
money could help move humane issues ahead, particularly grassroots
efforts. Henry was a model grassroots leader. So I started giving him
some goal-specific money when needed and then an annual subsidy of
\$15,000. John Hoyt, the charismatic and highly professional friend and
president of the Humane Society of the United States \[HSUS\] during my
tenure at the ASPCA, talked to me about empowering Henry to continue
doing his animal-related work without his having to constantly worry
about money. Fred Davis and, later, Gus Thornton, who succeeded Fred as
MSPCA \[Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals\]
president, also provided Henry with money. But John Hoyt was the
catalyst in providing Henry with annual subsidies. My helping Henry in
this way did not take much prodding.

Henry was a good listener. When you were with Henry he’d make you feel
good about yourself and your ideas. He’d take out a little notebook, for
example, and say, “John, you put that just right. Say it one more time.
I want to jot that down. Say that one more time.” Suddenly you think,
“my God, Henry Spira thinks I said something brilliant. Wow. I love this
guy.”

I made it my business to listen to and evaluate the players in the
growing animal rights movement. I wanted to know what they perceived
this movement to be at its core and how that core resonated with my own
ethical understandings. Many people still do not see animal abuse as the
affront it is to an animal rights philosophy. Others who maybe
grudgingly agree that animals do share a right not to be abused by
humans, see this as the least important rights movement of the many
rights movements of the twentieth century. I increasingly saw it as the
umbrella for all rights movements and, in that sense, the most important
of rights movements. This, of course, requires that we rightfully
recognize ourselves as animals who must not be abused by humans, which
means that we, as humans, are therefore obliged not to abuse other
animals, both human and non-human.

Henry Bergh, the ASPCA founder, spoke about animal rights as early as
1866. I was pleased to discover that people were starting to talk about
and think about animal rights again. I immediately become a student of
Henry Bergh as soon as I became head of the organization he founded. I
am also a believer and practitioner of organizational goals and
objectives. Goals and objectives exist to advance an organization’s
mission and Henry Bergh wrote a mission statement that, for its time,
was a model of brevity and sensibleness and, for me, a guide for all I
did and tried to do while running the ASPCA. “The ASPCA,” said Bergh,
“exists to provide effective means for the prevention of cruelty to
animals throughout the United States.” I increasingly wanted to help
define that term for public consumption, but first I needed to learn
more about who was who in the then fledging animal rights movement, how
they were positioning this movement and how I might partner the ASPCA
with these efforts. What bothered me early on was the lack of public
clarity with regard to what animal rights meant, a reality that still
allows animal abusers to ludicrously demean that term to this day.

Miles: This was in the mid-1980s?

Kullberg: These evaluations began soon after my starting at the ASPCA on
January 3, 1979, the same date that Ed Koch became mayor of New York
City and around the time that Alex Pacheco’s exposé of the cruel
treatment of the so-called Silver Spring Monkeys became an international
event and a benchmark for the American animal rights movement. The then
nascent animal rights movement intrigued me from the start. I made it my
business to speak with and write to and support in whatever ways I
could, often with money, always with encouragement, key players in the
animal rights movement. I did what I could to grow this very important
cause, this movement that envelops all rights movements, because its
timing was long overdue and it’s cause was right.

To the surprise of many, I was given a lot of freedom to pursue my
animal rights interests while at the ASPCA because I was a trained
professional administrator and had paid my dues by saving that
organization from bankruptcy while advancing within it a more logical,
ethical and compassionate foundation. I was given the opportunity to
develop the ASPCA as a national player in the American humane movement
by the then board president, Marvin Schiller, who hired me following my
two months as acting executive director. Marvin had a doctorate in
Industrial Psychology and was vice president of a prestigious executive
search firm (A. T. Kearney). His trust and support meant very much to
me. I believe he also understood that America’s SPCA needed to come out
from under its New York City myopia and once again address Henry Bergh’s
still in place mission to provide effective means for the prevention of
cruelty to animals throughout the United States.

Things I did early on helped people to become more understanding of the
ASPCA’s important hands on and advocacy roles. Increasingly and
correctly I was perceived as someone committed to doing the right thing
for animals in New York and nationally as an animal rights advocate. One
example, as noted earlier, was getting rid of decompression chambers.
The board appreciated my success in this regard because the former
executive director was asked to do this and he said it couldn’t be done.
The moves I made to raise operating and endowment income for the ASPCA
started to reap good results. We were not attracting enough money to
cover our losses initially, but enough to forestall our going bankrupt.
When I began at the ASPCA in early 1978 we had about \$3 million in our
endowment and a \$4 million annual operating budget. When I left in mid
1991 in addition to a tenfold increase in our endowment and a five fold
increase in our operating budget, an operating budget that was
consistently in the black, we also increased our supporting members
almost two hundred fold, from less than three thousand members when I
started to more than six hundred thousand when I resigned.

Financially and ethically I started to take on the city of New York as
soon as I took over the ASPCA. Now, I have a bit of a New England
accent. Listening to that accent, some people might say, “Oh, okay. This
New Englander doesn’t sound like someone who is going to really win this
New York City fight.” (Raising money from the city for municipal
services was always a fight.) But I more than hold my own in a contract
negotiation, particularly when I know I’m right. I’m not bragging about
that. It’s something I learned about myself, that if I’m right on the
issue, I’ll hold my own. If I find that I don’t have any other choice
but to compromise, then I would take what I could when the issue was a
matter of money (not so when the issue was ethics), because the reality
was we could not ignore the need we alone were providing for lost,
unwanted and injured animals in New York City. Thus, all too often we
took what we could and resolved to come back harder the next year. With
the city, animal control contract negotiations were never easy.

The city would bring in teams of people to tell me they couldn’t afford
this or they couldn’t afford that. I would say, “Then we’re going to
stop, within a month, animal control in this city and the problems this
will cause will then be in your hands.” We would often get into shouting
matches, each telling the other what they could do or could not do. The
city would bring twelve or more people to a meeting with my treasurer
and me, ostensibly thinking that if their sense of fairness was
deficient, and it always was, then perhaps a show of bureaucratic force
would help. It didn’t.

Bureaucracies, especially government bureaucracies, like to bring a lot
of people to meetings. I prefer to go to a negotiation alone or, at
most, with one or two other people, to make the point that, “I’m only
one person here, folks. And you only need one person to resolve our
differences should reason prevail. What are you other guys doing here?
Why do so many of you need to be at this meeting when only one of you
was given the assignment by the mayor to resolve this easily resolvable
dispute.” And I was always prepared to get up and leave a meeting when
they weren’t moving toward a fair agreement, saying, “Fine. I am leaving
because this meeting is useless. We’re putting you on notice that our
role as the city’s dog catcher will end unless reason and fairness
eventually prevail here.” One deputy mayor described me to an executive
recruiter as someone who chewed nails and ate glass for breakfast. I’ve
never been more complimented!

Legally we were at a disadvantage because of an 1880s state law that
said what we were doing in animal control we were legally bound to do
since we agreed back then to collect dog license fees, which, in turn,
obliged us to do animal control. Unless we could revise the law we had
no option to do municipal animal control. And we could not find any
state senators and state assemblymen willing to help us revise a law
that financially favored the city. Talking with my attorneys we sought a
way out of this century-old technicality, but without new legislation we
were not making much progress, and the state legislators were
consistently not interested in helping us. We then set upon a plan to
change this impasse. If we stopped doing some aspect of animal control,
e.g., not having an animal shelter in each borough, which we could no
longer afford in any event, the city might threaten to take over the
collection of dog license fees by changing the law. It was the legally
mandated collection of dog license fees by the ASPCA that was causing
the legal problem. We couldn’t give up animal control altogether the way
the law was written, and if we collected the fees, as the law obliged us
to do, we had to run a shelter. But, as we only slowly came to
understand, only one shelter, not five! Borough presidents apparently
never read the 1880s law, for they told us repeatedly we were obliged to
run a shelter in each borough, and we initially believed this to be
true. Telling them later that they were wrong didn’t help when, for
almost ninety years, our actions said otherwise. So while I was
struggling for a fair city contract to offset the inadequacy of dog
license fees, up the sleeve of some of the people on the opposite side
of the table was their understanding from their legal people that we
were a bit stuck because of the ninety-year-old erroneously implemented
dog license fee mandate.

I recall going to one city council hearing into why we weren’t doing
more to help animals instead of threatening to do less. A fellow named
Alan Hevassi, the current New York City treasurer and a candidate for
mayor, was then in the New York State Assembly and represented the
Borough of Queens. We had closed our shelter in Queens, and the borough
president was, to say the least, not happy about this. There was a
meeting of the city council to look into the ASPCA’s so-called
malfeasance in not spending more money on animal control, i.e. not
living up to what they stubbornly believed were obligations for running
full service shelters in each borough. Hevassi testified that he had
looked at our latest audited financial report. He said that we had
sufficient money to do this and do that. “I advise the council to take a
very strong stand against the ASPCA” was his concluding comment.

I can recall my personal satisfaction in following Hevassi to the
microphone, temporarily putting aside my prepared statement and saying,
“This is really, for me, a very difficult thing to say, because I do
respect Mr. Hevassi. I know he has a very important role in representing
the interests of Queens in the State Assembly, and that he’s on the
Finance Committee of the State Assembly. But we have just seen an
example of a politician who doesn’t know how to read a certified audit
report. That’s embarrassing. I am embarrassed as a citizen of this city
to think that we have someone representing city interests in Albany who
doesn’t know how to read a financial statement. So let me help him out.”
I then explained where he had misrepresented our financial figures.
Hevassi got up and left the hearing. He walked out of the meeting, I
believe, because he knew I was right and that he had indeed embarrassed
himself. Did I mention that this is the man who is the current New York
City treasurer who now wishes to become its mayor?

For whatever reason, I was never nervous or shy about defending what I
believe was right and fair for any organization I ran to any audience or
media outlet whom I could get to listen. That and the fund-raising
success I have always had, as well as an absence, over time, of raised
voices at my monthly community meetings and an appreciable increase in
understanding and support bolstered my readiness to speak out. I was
able, therefore, without writing long proposals to the board for their
approval beforehand, able to bring more of the issues inherent in an
animal rights philosophy before the public.

I respected what People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals \[PETA\]
was then doing. I still admire the energies and gutsiness of PETA. Every
movement has to have a radical voice or it probably will not be
effective. They remain the humane movement’s necessary radical voice,
albeit I am finding some of their more recent public relations tactics
puzzling, since harassment of patrons of fast food restaurants
approaches violence and the animal rights movement is about peace, not
violence. Exposing our cause to ridicule and using our cause as an
excuse to harass children and their parents at McDonalds are not helpful
tactics.

When I was at Columbia University as a doctoral student I was also a
resident hall counselor, an appointment that lasted the two years I was
completing my doctoral courses. This was during the Cambodian and
Vietnamese war years that brought seemingly endless demonstrations and
occasionally riots to several American college and university campuses.
Because I was a resident hall counselor I had a room overlooking the
quadrangle. One evening I discovered I could levitate. From total sleep
I levitated at least three feet off my bed. Someone shoved a stick of
dynamite up the rear end of Alma Mater, a big bronze statue in front of
the library. It resonated so loudly that I am still certain my
levitation claim is correct! I had never heard anything like that. I
thought the building I was in had blown up.

But I also became more aware of the logical reasons that were behind the
demands that the American government cease and desist from its war
efforts in Vietnam and Cambodia. The Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee \[SNCC\] and other radical groups were pointing out the
reality and foolishness of many federal government wartime policies that
killed and maimed a disproportionate number of black men. The
government, while unwilling to negotiate behavioral standards and
otherwise be accountable to discuss grievances with citizens whom it
termed radicals, at least would negotiate with those whom it considered
more “trustworthy.” When I reflect now on the American humane movement I
see many similarities it has had with the war in Asia. PETA’s radical
reputation pales when compared with SNCC and the Black Panthers. But
their source of radical energy was and is similar. The need to advance a
right and timely cause, in this instance a proper understanding of
animal rights, and the consequent need of increasingly compassionate
lifestyles, are more needed today than ever before. The animal rights
movement at its core is a peace movement based on a philosophy of
nonviolence, non-abuse, respect and reverence for life.

I early on identified several key players in this movement, among them,
of course, were and still are Christine Stevens, Peter Singer, John
Hoyt, Robert Brown, Richard Avanzino, Ingrid Newkirk, Michael Fox, Jim
Mason, Tom Regan, Alex Pacheco, Alex Herschaft, Richard Morgan, Brad
Miller, Belton Mouras, and many, many more. Key players who have died
include Cleveland Amory, Henry Spira and Helen Jones.

Alex Herschaft is one of the movement’s key leaders, albeit many are
surprised when I point out this very obvious fact. This son of
concentration camp parents founded an organization called the Farm
Animal Reform Movement \[FARM\] and set out to tutor generations of
young people on how to live in ways consistent with an animal rights
philosophy, as well as ways to advance that philosophy by adopting a
vegan-centered compassionate lifestyle.

Alex is a graciously polite individual. He was the first to organize
annual conferences of activists and soon-to-be activists in the animal
rights movement. He would typically arrange his July animal rights
conferences at a college campus somewhere where food – vegan food, of
course – and rooms would be cheap and where adequate seminar rooms and
lecture halls would be available. He would invite everybody – movement
activists such as Cleveland Amory, Henry Spira, Alex Pacheco, and even
me! We came together, gave presentations, subjected ourselves to
questions and, together with the hundreds of people who came to Alex’s
conferences, grew, philosophically and tactically, while becoming ever
more aware of the vast universe of suffering animals. And we were able
to meet and network with movement leaders who were committed to ending
as much suffering as possible as quickly as possible. Alex would start
the day at seven in the morning with exercise and breakfast
get-togethers and then so-called plenary sessions, followed by a vast
array of workshops hosted by speakers with some background in the topic
being discussed. Suddenly it’s eleven o’clock at night and you’ve got
three more days to go. Alex’s conferences still are superb learning
experiences for all attendees, including Alex.

Alex is a kind and ethically driven man and everybody accepted him and
still accepts him as the facilitator of these conferences. Good things
were happening. He was a non-threatening person, a characteristic all
leaders in this movement do not share. He brought people together to
discuss ideas who might otherwise never meet each other, never network
together, and, in a very real way, never grow as animal rights
activists. He still runs what continues to be the University of the
Animal Rights Movement (my terminology). Belton Mouras also ran somewhat
similar grass roots conferences while head of the Sacramento-based
Animal Protection Institute, but no one does a better job of drawing in
and training grassroots animal rights activists than does Alex.

He still organizes annual animal rights conferences, typically in
Washington, DC and always in the summer. Young men and women interested
in helping advance the animal rights movement still attend, meet with
and listen to each other, and to the many speakers Alex brings in. The
old guard, when they attend, still learn from the new guard. Nothing
more important happens for our cause than when people identifying with
this important movement take courage and energy and understanding from
each other.

The Humane Society of the United States has annual conferences, now
called Expos, but mostly for shelter workers, as does the American
Humane Association. They bring people together and expose them to their
staffs, and some few others, and they are good and useful experiences.
But these helpful conferences do not substitute for what Alex does in
the meetings he puts together. There is no nervousness about animal
rights that leads to equivocations such as “We’re going to call this
animal protection, not animal rights. We don’t want to scare people
off.” Or “Animal welfare is still a good and useful term.” None of that.
You eat vegan. It’s animal rights, properly defined and tactically
explored. You’ve got something to say? Say it. If you don’t like what’s
going on, tell us. God bless Alex Herschaft. Simply put, he is one of
the most significant movers of efforts to help animals have a reprise
from abuse in the latter half of the past century. In the early years of
this new millennium he continues to help others understand what an
animal rights philosophy is all about, and his efforts are more
critically needed now than ever before.

In the mid-1980s Belton Mouras, in addition to his annual conferences,
put together what he hoped would be an annual gathering of the heads of
humane organizations (called the Summit for the Animals) with support
from the Brach Foundation. Alex would occasionally raise his hand during
these meetings and he’d have something of substance to say, usually on
the issue of farm animals, even when the movement wasn’t quite there
yet. You know, in the early 1980s people weren’t talking much about the
sufferings of farm animals other than milk fed veal calves. You had some
people out there — Jim Mason putting some books and articles together on
the evils of factory farming, and Peter Singer pointing out some of the
problems in Animal Liberation, Regan in The Case for Animal Rights and
Fox in Returning to Eden. But for the most part the Summit focused on
lab animals, strategies to protect domesticated animals, and
administrative issues. But in the arena of greatest cruelty, factory
farming, too many of us were not mobilizing quickly enough to end ever
increasing farm animal abuse. Nor were people talking enough about
circus animals and wild animals, and the Summit has yet to give
appropriate attention to the importance of environmental concerns that
impact on the well being of all sentient life.

What we’re doing now at the Wildlife Land Trust, for example, is setting
up “shelters without walls” for wild animals as one way to counter what
is a worldwide war on wild animals that employs as its most deadly
weapon the destruction of wildlife habitats. We help wild animals by
saving their land. Every animal shelter and humane advocacy organization
in the country should be involved in bringing to the attention of those
in their geographic areas who have significant natural habitat holdings
the need to preserve those habitats. This is not being done. As a
consequence, wild animals are the losers. As I noted earlier, we protect
unspoiled wildlife habitats from violent human interventions. This is a
very important animal rights crusade, and the Wildlife Land Trust
remains the only national/international land trust with this animal
rights-congruent mission.

When Alex would raise his hand to say something about farm animals at
Summit meetings in the 1980s, many would listen politely and then go on
to something else. “Oh, Alex, God. We hear the same thing every time
from him. A great guy, but let’s get back to the agenda.” I can identify
even more with what must have been Alex’s frustration now, because I
have received polite stares from most Summit participants when I discuss
the singular ability a land trust such as ours has to help increasingly
at-risk wild animals.

Fortunately, when it comes to farm animals this period of limited
involvement from animal rights leaders is no longer the case, for we all
know that we must do more to end the agonies that take place on factory
farms and in the stockyards and processing plants. Because of this focus
on farm animals now, I take heart that the importance of protecting
at-risk wild animals by protecting the lands they inhabit may be better
understood and addressed by my cause confreres in the future.
Environmental pollution from the vast volumes of urine, feces and blood
these animals produce are major life-endangering realities that are
getting worse, not better, as these infectious soups in the lagoons
built to hold them pollute the air with noxious methane gas and leach
into aquifers, lakes, rivers and oceans where the life sustaining
qualities of these water environments give way to the lethally
destructive consequences of the unmanageable waste disposal problems
associated with the factory farming of animals for food. Of note, of
course, is the inseparable connection between our concerns for the
animals and our concerns for our life-nurturing and sustaining
environments they and we need to survive.

\[End Tape 2, Side B; Begin Tape 3, Side A\]

Henry Spira, for many years, didn’t appreciate Alex. He found his
tactics particularly annoying. Alex, for example, would do acts of
passive resistance, such as conducting a sit-in at the United States
Department of Agriculture that would lead to his arrest. Henry thought
that Alex would pick the wrong time and proceed in the wrong way. But
several years before Henry died, Henry realized that the issue of farm
animals should be his priority cause. Henry Spira, I think, grew to
understand how important Alex, Jim Mason, Michael Fox and others were
for pushing the agenda of animal rights into the farm animal arena.

Miles: You mentioned Cleveland Amory was also on the Attorney General’s
Advisory Committee on Animals. How long were you involved with that
committee and was that your first meeting with Cleveland?

Kullberg: That advisory committee lasted several years and provided my
first opportunity to meet Cleveland. We had a good relationship in large
part because I came from the greater Boston area (Rhode Island) and he
from Boston proper. We loved to talk about the Boston Red Sox. We’d meet
and talk about some animal issues and then we’d talk about the Red Sox.
We’d spend a couple of hours recalling games we attended at Fenway Park,
usually during a luncheon meeting at New York City’s Russian Tea Room,
the nearest classy restaurant to the Fund for Animals offices in his
midtown apartment.

If I really wanted to prolong my conversation with Cleveland, there was
a fail-safe formula. I would just sit there and talk while we ate.
Cleveland, by the way, wasn’t a vegetarian. He was very much old school,
and thus unwilling to change many personal habits, or so it seemed to
me. Many consider him one of the secular saints of the movement. I don’t
think he was a saint by any measure, but he did powerful and important
things to help animals. He understood public relations as well as any
cause leader could. At his best he was great for taking on animal
abusers. He could phrase an issue and a response on the fly better than
anyone. But if I wanted to prolong a meeting with him at the Russian Tea
Room, when the check came, I simply would not pick it up. The
conversation would then go on and on and on. I could be there from
twelve-thirty to four o’clock in the afternoon, and if I didn’t pick up
the check, he wouldn’t pick it up either. He’d just keep talking. One
time I decided, come what may, I was not going to pick up the check. It
was about four-fifteen and we were still talking. So I looked down at
the check and I said, “Cleveland, I love the time we’re spending
chatting. It’s just great. But I picked up the check last time, and the
time before that.” He said, “Well, John, you’ve got all that ASPCA money
up there. Just pick it up and charge it to the ASPCA.” He was a
self-described Boston Brahmin and certainly didn’t die poor.
Nonetheless, to avoid an argument and to get on with my day, I picked up
the check.

I have never found anyone in this movement who was a leader and who was
honest with me whom I didn’t like. For example, Merritt Clifton, the
editor of Animal People, has offended many within the animal rights
movement, and that includes me, and remains a persona non grata at the
HSUS for all manner of reasons. But I have never found him dishonest
with me and have had, as a result, a positive long-term relationship
with him. Conversely, I believe the mutual respect we share is based on
the fact that I have always been honest with him. That said, with great
sacrifice I agreed not to be in contact with Merritt while employed at
the HSUS. My agreeing to this, to stop talking to a friend, remains
irksome and totally unnecessary. But conditioned by the vow of obedience
I once had, I have persevered other than when we have met when attending
conferences.

I was once invited to a radio interview with Ingrid Newkirk. We were
guests on the “Sally Jesse Raphael Show.” When I arrived Ingrid was
already in the lobby and she gave me a hostile greeting. She said, “I
don’t know why Sally would want me on a show with the president of the
ASPCA because we are so diametrically opposite in what we stand for.” I
said, “Ingrid, we’re not.” Her hostile stare did not vanish, and we were
soon called into Sally’s studio. This was my first meeting with both
Sally and Ingrid.

We sat down and Sally Raphael began our on-air interview asking a
question designed to spark some difference of opinion between Ingrid and
me. I seized the opportunity to answer first. I said, “Sally, I run what
many consider a very conservative organization. That said, let me tell
you what I believe.” I then described some aspects of my still
developing animal rights philosophy. As I recall, I spoke for four- or-
five-minutes. Sally was very gracious, and patiently let me speak. When
I finished, Sally turned to Ingrid, and Ingrid, I think, was in a state
of shock. Ingrid said, basically, “I agree with Dr. Kullberg.” The show
kind of went that way. She got the next question, and she would answer
it. Sally would say, “Well?” I’d say, “I have no disagreement with that,
except that all of what Ingrid is doing at PETA I am not able to do
right now at the ASPCA. It’s just the reality of the situation I’m in.
But I admire her and her animal-inclusive compassion centered philosophy
tremendously.”

When the show was over there wasn’t a hug and a kiss, but I would like
to think Ingrid knew that she had a philosophic soul-mate at the ASPCA.

George Cave is another of many unsung formateurs of the growing animal
rights movement in the 1980s. He was and is very bright and understood
the rights human and non-human animals share as well as anyone. The name
of the organization he founded reflected this: Trans-Species Unlimited.

George was a bit acerbic, and consequently was not the easiest fellow to
speak with. He often seemed angry, and had every right to be as we all
did at the two-faced and hypocritical nonsense being uttered by those
defending their right to use and abuse animals. I remember a day when
the two of us sat down on some granite steps leading to the library at
one of those summer college-based “Action for Animals” meetings that
Alex Herschaft put together. I wanted to learn more about Trans-Species
Unlimited. He talked freely and at length about his beliefs and his
tactics, and I enjoyed listening to him. Thereafter, he could do no
wrong in my view, including his willingness to accept Cleveland Amory’s
challenge during a Summit for the Animals meeting in South Carolina to
settle an ethical disagreement by stepping outside the room and having a
fight. My recollection is that George was about five feet tall, one
hundred pounds and thirty years of age in the mid 1980s. Cleveland was
some six feet three inches tall, weighed more than two hundred pounds,
and was more than sixty years old. The physical contrasts could not have
been greater, nor could the challenge Cleveland laid down, this
acknowledged animal rights leader, to violently try to settle an
argument over ascertainable facts.

I still respect the name Cave chose for his organization. It’s a name
that we do well to reflect upon, as is Peter Singer’s use of the term
animal liberation. Both Cave and Singer made the point that in
considering other species we need to think in their skin to the degree
we can of the pain and suffering they endure and by what right. Why
should tens of billions of animals each year be subjected to horrible
treatment solely because we have an interest in some food that we really
do not need and, in fact, would, overall, be healthier being without, as
well as an interest in procuring skin-sourced clothes we also do not
need to wear? The whole gamut of cruelty, “justified” by some people
because the sufferers are not human, is cause enough for the anger I
frequently saw in the face of George Cave.

When we look at our own companion animals (pets is a word many rightly
denounce), we see hypocrisy everywhere, and my own lack of remedial
action is no exception. We have a dog in our family, a black Lab named
Beatrice who was abandoned on a Long Island estate owned by some of our
friends. She is very fearful of men. God knows what some man did to her.
I know that Beatrice would be much happier if we had another dog in the
family. We have four cats, but only one dog. Our not yet inviting into
our family a second dog deprives this member of a gregarious species
ongoing contact with at least one other member of her species. Given
some new limits on our caretaking abilities, we probably will not remedy
this situation any time soon, but the truth is we should.

There are many persons in the humane movement who deserve canonization
as “secular saints.” Two favorite saints of mine are Jane Goodall and
Christine Stevens. Sam LaBudde is another. Sam signed on as a cook on a
commercial Peruvian tuna fishing boat and convinced the crew that his
video camera was a gift from his father so he could bring home some
pictures of his adventures at sea. His intent, however, was to document
the horrors of commercial tuna fishing. Dolphins often swim above
schools of tuna. As a consequence, when catching tuna, the nets used
encircle, catch, pull down and drown dolphins. Dolphins are mammals, and
as such when they cannot surface for air they drown. Sam’s videotapes
for the first time documented the horrors of what goes on in commercial
ocean fishing for tuna. Until Sam’s risky undertaking, no visual
documentation of this slaughter existed. He is a true humane movement
hero of mine, a true secular saint, and remains an inspiration to those
lucky enough to know him. My role in his adventure was to give him and
his video partner, Stan Minasian, the money they needed (about \$50,000)
to refine his video into a one hour documentary, Where Have All the
Dolphins Gone, that was shown on the Discovery Channel on Earth Day,
1988. I also arranged to have George C. Scott narrate the documentary.
This documentary had a major impact on the Heinz family member who owned
Star Kist: he promised to forswear so called “purse seine netting” and
only sell “dolphin safe” tuna, the first industry giant to make such a
major commitment. Other tuna canneries soon fell in line.

There are dozens of people worth mentioning for their ethical strength,
mental toughness, and caring humane commitment. I have been blessed to
have been involved with this movement since 1974. For twenty-six years
it’s been my privilege to be a participant in as well as an observer of
the who and what of this world-wide ethical adventure, the so-called
humane movement, and I am the better for these contacts and the ethical
and spiritual enlightenment they have nurtured. Alas, I am also too
aware of the slow pace of change from socially ingrained animal abuse
that only gets worse in so many areas as our human population increases.

After I left the ASPCA in 1991 I had no interest in leisure. After one
month I was offered the presidency of Guiding Eyes for the Blind, a
guide dog training school. After considerable musings and investigation
I agreed to accept this new challenge.

Miles: This was in 1992?

Kullberg: This was in 1991. I left the ASPCA in July 1991 and began my
tenure at Guiding Eyes in September of 1991. I initially had no interest
in working with guide dogs. But the presidency of Guiding Eyes for the
Blind was brought to my attention by an executive recruiter. She
researched my availability, called me up and said, “I want to tell you
about an organization I believe you should head.” She pointed out that,
first of all, they use dogs, “and you might be interested in studying
more about how and why they use them, and whether it’s as humane as
everyone says, because there have been some questions about guide dog
schools and the treatment of guide dogs by these schools as well as by
those who are blind. If you truly believe in animal rights, human and
non-human, you should also be interested in the disabled, in this
instance blind disabled people. You might want to have an opportunity to
spend a little time on the human side of the rights agenda since you
have spent so much time on the animal side, the non-human animal side.”
Clearly she knew how to interest me through an appeal to possible abuse,
animal rights and the trans-species connection!

I found this opportunity to become president of Guiding Eyes for the
Blind to be an interesting challenge. Having been given sufficient
salary and benefits to take a lengthy sabbatical, in consideration of
the close to fourteen years I served as ASPCA president (which was
preceded by three years spent as a board member and the two years I
agreed to be available as a consultant, a nineteen-year association,
overall). I was the first paid president of that historically important
humane organization (until that title was given to me it previously had
been, after Henry Bergh, ASPCA founder and its first president, an
honorary Board of Directors title), and I was the longest serving ASPCA
president/executive director in the twentieth century. Combined with the
additional salary I would receive from Guiding Eyes, the investigative
opportunities I was interested in exploring were too good to ignore.
Thus I also became the first paid president of that organization, in
deference to my having that title at the ASPCA.

My first objective at Guiding Eyes was to evaluate the wisdom of closing
down the school’s breeding center. My uninformed belief was that
potential guide dogs should be rescued from animal shelters. But before
I would recommend to the Board that we do that, I decided to do as
objective an evaluation as I could of what justified a guide dog
breeding program. Fortunately, Guiding Eyes for the Blind then had and
still has a very savvy woman, Jane Russenberger, running its breeding
programs. I soon understood that in this one exceptional case for
service animals (blind human beings must fully trust guide dogs for safe
mobility), dogs must be bred for temperament, strength and consistency
of responses regardless of whatever distractions they might encounter.
There was no way to develop these necessary attributes when choosing a
dog from a shelter — otherwise guide dog schools would be choosing
shelter dogs if only to save considerable money on their breeding
programs. Operating a first rate guide dog breeding program is expensive
even with volunteer puppy raiser assistance. A dog has to be conditioned
from birth. Blind people trust their mobility, hence their safety, to
guide dogs. If there is one serious mistake on the dog’s part, his or
her blind partner probably will no longer be confident enough to trust
his or her mobility to a guide dog in the future. As it is, less than
one-tenth of one percent of blind people choose guide dogs for mobility
assistance. But those who do can be tremendously helped.

There is also an issue as to whether service dogs are unduly worked by
their human caretakers. There is always the potential for problems
between human and non-human animals. An adoption, following careful
screening from the ASPCA or another adoption program that seems ideal,
for example, is no guarantee that the animal will be treated well. Blind
caretakers of guide dogs do not always treat their animals very well,
and when this is known, guide dog schools have to respond to protect
these very special dogs, just as adoption programs have to rescue
animals from bad placements.

When the match of a guide dog with a blind person works, it’s the
closest symbiotic relationship I’ve ever witnessed. My time at Guiding
Eyes for the Blind taught me that this relationship between human and
non-human animals can work very well and indeed be supportive and
emotionally rewarding for the dogs and their human caretakers.

I became president of Guiding Eyes for the Blind just as the Americans
with Disabilities Act was passed, which changed the whole paradigm of
how disabled people could confront the public and public services.
Suddenly many disabled people understood that they had rights that they
may not have been aware of before or, when aware, rights that were not
being recognized, particularly by service providers. While generalities
are dangerous, it is my observation that blind people for the most part
work hard at being very pleasant, because they have found interpersonal
relationships with sighted people requires this. They would typically go
to a restaurant and their approach was to ask for a favor: “I’m very
hungry and I’ll keep good control of my guide dog. Could I come in and
get a sandwich? Could we please have dinner here?” The restaurant owner
too often would say, “I’m sorry. We have no provisions for animals
inside.” Absent a state or local law to the contrary or a legal system
unwilling to enforce such laws, they then would have no option but to
walk away, still hungry. Or were they allowed in they were sure to be
sweet and appreciative of the “favor” they received and to tip
generously.

But this new law allowed the request to be a demand. They could go to a
restaurant and say, “I’d like to eat here.” “Well, you can’t.” “Okay,
could I have your name please? We already know the name of your
restaurant. You will be called in the morning by someone representing my
rights because I have a right to come in here and eat, and you’re
refusal to admit me and my dog means you have broken a federal law. This
isn’t only going to cost you some time dealing with some people who are
going to defend my right, but you’ll probably have some punitive damages
to pay. So let me try this one more time. I would like to eat here
tonight.” “Yes, sir (or madam), by all means.” A great moment ensues
where humans previously denied food at a public restaurant now have the
same right to dine out as sighted people, a right that, in practice,
they never had before. These “new” rights also included access to public
buildings (which often required owners to build ramps), busses, trains
and planes and accommodations to more fairly compete with those without
disabilities for jobs and education. I was able to witness and encourage
their assertiveness at the get-go.

What was my developing agenda at Guiding Eyes for the Blind? I wanted
the organization to be fully compliant with, internally, and
appropriately and effective involved with, externally, the movement on
rights for the disabled. One result was my becoming involved with some
activist groups and individuals because Guiding Eyes for the Blind, a
very conservative organization, needed a spirit that was less avuncular
and more collegial. This was the need at the ASPCA when I first arrived.
Because of my activist agenda I had some predictable problems,
especially with one board member who just happened to be the chairman
and another who, despite being blind would have been a credit to the
John Birch Society. The chairman felt my interest in the rights of the
disabled was not what he had in mind when I was hired as president, and,
in fairness, that interest on my part evolved in large part because of
the Americans with Disabilities Act. The times had changed, and our
responses needed to change also. There were also some managerial and
ethical shortcomings in his role as chairman that I found unacceptable,
including his trustworthiness. Promises not kept have always bothered
me, going back to promises made with regard to my pursuit of a graduate
degree that were not kept when I was a Christian Brother. But for the
most part my experience at Guiding Eyes was uplifting, I left a good
mark on the physical plant (in part by expeditiously responding to the
Americans with Disabilities Act), and consequently I thankfully became
much more sensitized to the needs of the disabled than would doubtfully
have been the case had I not had this experience.

Miles: You where there how long?

Kullberg: About two years.

Miles: Did you decide — the switch from the ASPCA to Guiding Eyes, did
you just feel that maybe you needed a change, a new challenge, a new
arena to move into.

Kullberg: Yes. I brought the ASPCA not only into great financial
solvency — we were a rather well-off organization when I left, in part
because we were negotiating city contracts that covered true costs, we
were getting superb responses to our direct mail appeals, and we were
receiving unprecedented major gift and bequest income that is often the
result of a successful direct mail program. The city finally understood
that it would only get what it paid for for municipal programs because
we were successful in getting the law that bound animal control services
to the ASPCA and not to New York City changed. Had I had at Guiding Eyes
for the Blind less micromanaging, a less conservative and more ethical
board chairman I would have accomplished much of the same there and in a
shorter period of time. But, in truth, the organization was not then
ready for the possibilities I represented. That happens in management,
and I hold no grudges. What seemed best for me was to resign and move
on. More on that later.

Now, I mentioned Alan Hevassi before. What happened in those city
council hearings is that I so upset him and others when I said that I
was determined to get a better day for the ASPCA or we were going to
close some more shelters, that the borough presidents got together and
decided that they should remove the ASPCA’s entitlement to dog license
fees. “We will bring the ASPCA to its knees” was their threat, by
changing the law so that the city would be able to partner with any
animal agency for municipal services, not just the ASPCA. They believed
that the ASPCA would then come groveling for those dog license monies.
Apparently they couldn’t read balance sheets either. I couldn’t believe
our luck. Their anger led to their resolving to our advantage our
problem with the state law. A bill was introduced by Hevassi in the New
York State Assembly which said that because the ASPCA had been
uncooperative, in essence, the city wanted more authority to determine
how license fees would be spent and who the collectors of the license
fees would be in the future.

To the surprise of several lawmakers, we lobbied in favor of the
proposed dog license law amendment. The existing law had bound us to an
indentured servant-like role that, once changed, we no longer would be
bound by. The bill passed and was signed by the governor. So the very
next contract we negotiated, we received almost double the contract
amount that we received the previous year, in large part because for the
first time we could really threaten to walk away from animal control
were not the city of reimburse use for our true costs in carrying out
animal control services the city was responsible for, not the ASPCA. I
go into this in greater detail in Overpopulation of Cats and Dogs:
Causes, Effects and Prevention.\[7\] I will attach relevant pages from
that book to this history.\[8\]

The city was up in arms. But we won. The city had no fallback — except
to complain about the tough stand taken by the ASPCA and me personally.
You have to live in New York City to know what a treat it was to put the
city on the defensive and win. The mayor and borough presidents finally
understood why we lobbied in favor of changing the dog license law. But
obtaining a \$5.2 million city contract in 1971 from \$3.3 million the
year before took both bargaining skills and perseverance, two qualities
that apparently were lacking after I left, for the next contract (1992)
was back to \$3.3 million.

I remember one meeting where the tension was huge. Seeing the
possibility of a long overdue ASPCA victory, the ASPCA’s board chairman
and board treasurer were nonetheless amazed that I was inflexibly
holding the line I was, but fortunately they did not interfere. I
believe they would have caved in much earlier had they trusted my
judgment less. The head of the Teamster Union in New York City became a
supporter of ours because he, at least, knew how to read balance sheets
and wanted to save the jobs of the ASPCA Teamster members who would be
laid off were our contract target not fully met. In the end, an
agreement was arrived at because the city had no option but to concede
every contested point in our request for a \$2 million contract
increase.

I just sat there after winning. I was still upset because of the
agitation achieving this victory for homeless animals required and the
injustice, from my point of view, that the city’s up to then
intransigence demonstrated. The negotiating representative of the city,
a deputy mayor, came over to shake hands. I wouldn’t shake hands, even
though we had won everything. The Teamster president said, “John, you’ve
got to play the game here. Stand up and shake hands. Let’s get out of
this room.” I stood up, shook hands, admittedly in hindsight, too
grudgingly, and that was the end of it. But my battles with the city
were always difficult during my tenure at the ASPCA. To at last win a
truly fair contract was sweet and just. Hevassi also was forced to
realize how great a service he had done for us. In leading the effort to
change the law, rather than weakening our bargaining position, he
strengthened it. Sweet justice at last!

I recall, soon after this victory, receiving an invitation from the
Mayor (Ed Koch) to join him for dinner at Gracie Mansion, which I
accepted. This invitation ostensibly was to show his appreciation for a
letter I sent to the New York Times praising his stand on another
animal-related matter that the Times published. His interest in me
clearly increased as my success in dueling with the city on contract
issues so resoundingly ended in our favor, as it long before should
have. A most cordial and entertaining evening with the mayor it was,
including the time we spent exploring many animal-related issues on
which we had differences of opinion.

Let me broach that period when I left the ASPCA. For starters, I am
under duress to say very little because of a contract I entered into
when I left, a standard procedure for heads of profit and non-profit
enterprises when they leave that enterprise. Thus my comments will be
limited to information already before this public, principally through
newspaper accounts. The freedom I was given at the beginning of my
tenure at the ASPCA to run the organization as I saw fit began to be
challenged when I worked on and published a handbook on animal rights
and human responsibilities aptly called The Animal Rights Handbook,\[9\]
that was intended, in part, to celebrate the ASPCA’s 125th anniversary.
More than four hundred thousand copies were eventually sold. There were
some disagreements on the board as to how my increasingly obvious animal
rights philosophy was affecting some of them. I took issue, for example,
with board members who boldly indulged in fox hunts and bird shoots, so
boldly, in fact, that they attracted embarrassing media attention to the
hypocrisy this involvement demonstrated, given their ASPCA associations.
My challenging participants in the Westminster Kennel Club’s annual
Madison Square Garden Dog Show to more humanely kennel their dogs also
did not sit well with some board members. Despite the ASPCA’s mission
statement, some on the board saw the ASPCA as solely a New York City dog
and cat organization. But its ethical purpose and its solvency lay in
its national role as an ethical force to be reckoned with by animal
abusers everywhere.

I began to understand that I probably had gone about as far as I could
to push the organization forward, given some of these growing realities.
I had successfully completed my efforts to establish all new ASPCA
facilities throughout the city for animals under our care, as well as
build a new national headquarters facility that was fully paid for when
it opened in 1991. I had brokered the sale of the ASPCA’s outdated
property in Manhattan’s upper east side that housed too small a shelter,
an outdated veterinary hospital, and insufficient office space for our
local, statewide and national advocacy programs, our city and state law
enforcement responsibilities, and our executive offices.

The first offer we received for this property was \$1.5 million. The
board chairman suggested we consummate the deal when, over many months
of negotiating, I had raised the amount to \$11.5 million. I asked for
time to play the card of developers bidding against each other through
me a bit longer, for we needed even more money to properly
re-orchestrate ourselves in Manhattan’s upper east side, a board
dictated relocation demand. I finally negotiated an offer of \$22.5
million, that included several quid pro quos that were to our advantage.
The board enthusiastically accepted the fruits of my negotiations as
well it should.

And we solidified our plans on nearby sites I also found in order to
build a new national headquarters that included a state-of-the-art
veterinary hospital where early spay/neuter could be done in an absolute
sterile environment (a major breakthrough because now you could put up
for adoption spayed and neutered puppies and kittens as well as cats and
dogs) and an adoption center. And we built and fully paid for a separate
animal shelter for municipal programs, a facility that would no longer
operate within our headquarters building, to further underscore our
preparedness to give up New York City animal control responsibilities.
And we constructed these facilities without stopping any of our existing
shelter, veterinary and other program efforts because I also discovered
a city-backed low interest bond program that could be used to pay for
new construction. This program had previously been limited to for-profit
businesses that needed to replace their outdated facilities in order to
keep them in New York City. I sought a not-for-profit exception, and
with timely and skillful legal help, the exception was granted. This was
needed because the developer who offered us \$22.5 million would not pay
us until we moved out. But our hands-on obligations would not permit a
lengthy hiatus that a move during construction would require. Thus we
achieved an overall fiscal coup by attracting an unprecedented real
estate purchase agreement and a New York State-backed low interest bond
issue that provided all the monies needed for the construction of all
new ASPCA facilities in Manhattan, a successful outcome that led to the
Mid-Manhattan Chamber of Commerce naming me their 1988 Man of the Year.
Were the city not to provide appropriate contract monies in the future,
which, after I left, happened (given the precedent I established, I
still do not know why negotiations failed after I left). The \$5.2
million contract precedent, reduced to \$3.5 million, meant that the
ASPCA could not much longer afford such largess to the city. My decision
to locate the new municipal animal control services shelter eighteen
blocks away so that it could be turned over to the city without causing
any disruption to other ASPCA programs made the turning over of animal
control services to the city more doable and, on hindsight, perhaps too
easy.

Henry Bergh would nonetheless be proud, for he had serious reservations
concerning the ASPCA’s taking on animal control services in the first
place. The ASPCA was no longer held hostage to a poorly conceived 1880s
New York State law and was finally in a position, legally and
physically, to chart its own future of providing effective means for the
prevention of cruelty to animals throughout the United States. Making
the ASPCA whole so that it could plan its own future without New York
City adversely affecting its financial resources was perhaps my most
important contribution as president. My personal best effort as
president will always be for me, however, my attempts to infuse into its
public and private persona a rights-based ethical soul. The integrity
and ability of future presidents will continue to be challenged in this
regard.

Having nurtured as much as I could a sensible animal rights philosophy
at the ASPCA and shepherded the construction and payment of all new
facilities, and restored financial stability for an organization going
bankrupt when I took it over, I sensed that with this positive
resolution of once endemic financial and infrastructure problems, and
with the more conservative elements on the ASPCA board clearly not yet
ready for the ASPCA to be the ethically consistent animal rights
organization I had prepared it to be, the time seemed ripe for me to
leave. There was also an egotistical part of me that was saying, “I made
such a big turnaround here over a relatively short period of time, I
wonder what else is out there that might now challenge me and, yes,
perhaps financially reward me and my maturing family more.” I was
obviously getting a little cocky, but with some justification. I thought
I could take on any opportunity to lead a cause and make it advance in
ways consistent with its mission and financial ability to ably pursue
its mission.

So I resigned from the ASPCA when an officer of the board countermanded
my decision to fire, with cause, an ASPCA employee who had befriended
him. I recommended to the board that they consider hiring Roger Caras as
their new president, and he indeed was chosen, albeit only after an
expensive search firm agreed with my recommendation. It’s admittedly
difficult for a past-president to comment on a new president
objectively. That said, I thought Caras would see that ending his career
with this appointment, given his media history, would further enhance
the ASPCA’s rightful influence as a national ethical force for good. He
did some new things and some good things. But I do not believe he saw
all of the leadership possibilities or, if he did, he chose not to
pursue them. Nor did Caras understand the linkage between non-human and
human abuse, for his what can only be described as malicious and
calumnious disparagements regarding Michael Fox, Alex Pacheco, John Hoyt
and many other luminaries within this highly ethical movement are
legion.

As a consequence the ASPCA’s role as a true leader of the American
animal rights movement seems to me to be considerably weaker than was
the case when I left, albeit not irremediably so. But the ASPCA can only
make a truly ethical difference by nurturing respect for all sentient
life, respect that is based on a sensible animal rights philosophy well
promulgated and practiced, and the sooner the better.

Miles: You were married by this time?

Kullberg: I married my lovely and dear wife, Karol, in 1979. My wife has
ever since been at my side and remains very supportive of everything
I’ve ever done since we were married, even when significant professional
disruptions were the results. She is a psychotherapist who gave up a
well-developed private practice to come to Germantown, Maryland, where
we now live. She’s a terrific person.

Miles: And your daughters were —

Kullberg: Well, this is 2001. One, Kathryn, is soon to be twenty and the
other, Kristen, is eighteen. My son, Evan, is fourteen. I’m trying to
help them make ethical choices for themselves rather than in response to
parental mandates. My oldest daughter is a vegetarian, with occasional
exceptions. But she chose this commitment herself, and I believe that
she will inevitably become a practicing vegan when the realties and her
determination to base her life choices on those realities, regardless of
the difficulties involved, become clearer. She cares deeply about animal
rights, a compassion soon to be nurtured even more as she partakes of a
summer internship with EarthVoice, a sustainable development,
environmental ethics organization closely affiliated with the HSUS. My
second daughter I believe will also eventually become a vegan. But it
will be her decision, not mine.

And my son, Evan, shows ever increasing evidence of his need to reflect
in his own actions and choices the changes that must take place for our
Earth to continue providing a nurturing environment for sentient life
forms. One of the ways that sons and fathers deal with each other is for
sons to do the opposite of what they know their fathers want. It’s a
little power play for him, so it will take a while longer for his food
choices to better reflect his ethical values, which are strong. I’m
certain he will come to terms with the reality of how his choices impact
on animal suffering. We must be sensitive to that and live our lives
accordingly. My proudest boast is that I have ethically sensitive
children and an ethically sensitive wife — my life has been and
continues to be enhanced because of this.

Miles: And your wife has followed —

Kullberg: Yes, she is a vegetarian, with the occasional exceptions I
also am guilty of, but she is very enlightened on the philosophical side
of why we must commit to at least a vegetarian diet if we have also
committed to growing with a truly compassionate lifestyle.

Why so much emphasis here on food? Because, increasingly, those who
speak out in defense of animals from abusive humans have daily
opportunities to test their humane commitments, and the most visible
test is in their choices of food and clothing. Consuming animal flesh
and wearing clothes and ornaments that required animal suffering to
produce provide further evidence of choices that are inconsistent with
knowledge of systemic abuse, choices that can only be referenced as
supporting cruelty. We must be the change we wish to see in the world.
This also holds for resource depletion. Long showers connote
indifference, for example, but many teenagers would prefer not to
acknowledge this if my observations at home are any indication.

I gave a lecture recently to a class at St. Mary’s College (the honors
college of the University of Maryland) on ethics and the environment.
And many of the things I’ve touched upon here, philosophically, I
touched upon in that lecture. I was delighted I was given that
opportunity. My purpose was to show how the animal rights movement,
properly defined, ties into the environmental movement, and that the
issues are and will always be ethical ones. Ethics is what logic and our
intuition tells us about right and wrong. Morality is what our logic and
our intuitions, as well as revelation found in sacred books and
religious traditions, tell us what is right and wrong. What logic
doesn’t affirm, tradition and sacred books tell us to believe. Such
beliefs constitute one’s faith and one’s moral guide. You can’t prove
it, but you believe it because revelation and tradition says its so.
Could there logically be three persons in one God? Should we go to
church every Sabbath day? Are those who are not members of our religion
ineligible for heaven? Faith, not logic, answers yes for many. Is it
ethical to donate blood to the Red Cross? A logically based ends/means
test might support a negative response for some, given the purpose of
one’s blood and the interventionist means undertaken to share it.
(Contrary to popular perception, logic applied to the human condition
does not always lead to identical conclusions, albeit most of the time
it does.) Intuition, in such an instance, could well counter with a
common sense “yes” response. Of note here is that religious tradition
and revelation need not be a party to this debate and, as a consequence,
when faith-based behavior contradicts ethical analyses for a pluralistic
society ethics rules.

I’m pretty well schooled on ethics and morality, having studied and
considerably reflected on both while in college and having taught moral
theology during my years as a Christian Brother. In a secular setting we
should focus on ethics, which seeks truth by applying logic and the
insights possible through intuition, with the core ethical understanding
being that the end must never justify unethical means to obtain it.

The problem with morality, with its dependence on faith-based traditions
and scriptural revelations, both of which often defy both logic and
intuition, is that it can often be divisive and hurtful. Consider those
Islam sects whose members are taught to believe that to kill even the
innocent among their targeted enemies and to die in the process is a
passport into heaven. The morality imposed by the religious leaders of
the Taliban sect in Afghanistan diminishes and belittles women. Their
male members have decreed that their natural beauty is always to be
hidden from others, and their intellectual gifts have little opportunity
to be developed since formal education is offered only to males. A truly
ethical guide to personal and social behaviors would do much to bring
Afghanistan back into the community of nations and spare its female
community much frustration by allowing them to develop all of their
God-given talents and interests.

I’ve studied metaphysics, epistemology, cosmology and theology,
especially moral theology. And I had the good luck while an
undergraduate to study ethics as taught by a brilliant professor. My
Christian-imparted moral beliefs, informed by my studied appreciation of
ethics, convincingly tell me, for example, that we do not need to nor
should we place the Ten Commandments at the front of every public school
classroom, as many politicians and clergy, understandably upset with
perceived ethical deficiencies in children, and representing as best
they can their secular and religious constituencies, advocate. We do not
need to appeal to scripturally derived standards when social and
personal responsibilities and values can be imparted to children from an
ethical standpoint without scriptural mandates that can often be
conflicting within a society committed to being tolerant of differing
religions. We don’t have to be Catholics or Protestants or Buddhists or
Muslims to agree with each other concerning ethically coherent social
values and responsibilities. We can properly raise our children by
supporting community behavioral standards that are ethically grounded in
logic and intuition, socially and individually applied.

We can agree on proper behavior and care for our country, our
communities, our children and ourselves and evaluate what’s wrong with
society by referring to the ethical principle that the means used to
bring about good ends must always be ethically appropriate. It’s very
important to understand this prime ethical standard and live by it.
Intuition can support rare exceptions to this standard, but intuition
should never be allowed to reject the importance of logical reasoning.
Our well-being as individuals and nations representing many different
religion nonetheless depends on shared, ethically derived values if the
specter of a religious-produced tower of Babel is to be avoided.

The commodity/economical justifications behind the factory farming of
food animals are ethically unsustainable. Attempts to diminish a
movement that says all animals have a right not to be abused by humans
are also ludicrous. The perpetrators of abuse for profit don’t want
people to logically evaluate what they do to sentient life because the
results could diminish the financial returns on their investments.
Similar reasoning would condone the behavior of people who rob banks.
And some of these people actually use religious traditions and literal
interpretations of scriptural passages of obviously questionable
accuracy, given the fact that the original scriptures that these
passages represent are no longer available as accuracy checks, and using
sacred texts such as the Bible to justify abuse is ludicrous. When such
nonsense comes out of morally incoherent propositions, religiously
tolerant societies must have a survival recourse and that must be to let
ethics rule.

After leaving Guiding Eyes I received a call from Paul Irwin, the new
president-elect of the Humane Society of the United States. He initially
wanted me to become involved with HSUS education programs. For all
manner of reasons I wanted an opportunity to lead an environmental
organization.

I was of the belief that I would quickly find such an opportunity
because throughout my professional life I had never been denied any
position I applied for. But I was fifty-five when I left Guiding Eyes. I
applied for a couple of management opportunities, including something
with Greenpeace. I didn’t get the responses I had come to expect. This
was a first for me. Suddenly age discrimination, even in management,
became a factor, a possible bias that I had never previously
experienced.

Miles: It’s a hard lesson to learn.

Kullberg: It’s a difficult and humbling reality to experience. You come
to understand that the world doesn’t really need you, or if it does, it
will still survive without you. At the same time your family members
need you to provide the income and benefits they have come to expect.

Paul Irwin will always have my gratitude because he understood my wish
to get into the environmental side of the animal rights movement, and he
made this possible. He, supported by my good friend and senior vice
president of the HSUS, John Grandy, subsequently offered me the position
of executive director of the newly incorporated Humane Society of the
United States Wildlife Land Trust, and I enthusiastically accepted the
challenge this new organization represented. Only the negotiator in me
stood in the way of an immediate positive response!

The wildlife sanctuary birthing work I do now is very important to me,
philosophically and spiritually. We save land for wild animals and I
meet salt-of-the-earth people from different racial, ethnic, religious
and financial backgrounds who typically come together on a spiritual
level to demonstrate their appreciation of wildlife, especially wild
animals, by permanently dedicating their properties, with our help, as
permanent wildlife sanctuaries. These special people often talk about
animal rights. They even sometimes reference the sacredness of the land
and the creatures who dwell there. Some of these people are very poor,
and if they sold their land they could make life financially easier for
themselves. But they won’t. My having seen so many of the adverse
impacts of abusive human behaviors, these individuals do much to restore
my belief in the essential goodness of most humans, albeit I am always
wary of the yin and the yang in all of us, the good and the bad. Our
greatest weakness as a species is our failure to consistently match our
actions with what we believe to be right and appropriate. Most of the
landowners I meet who want to establish their lands as permanent
wildlife sanctuaries act and speak rightly, and I am the better for
knowing them.

\[End of Session\].

Dr. John Kullberg

Session \#2

January 7, 2001

Gaithersburg, Maryland

Julia Miles, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 4, Side A\]

Miles: During our last session we covered your background, your joining
a religious order, The Brothers of the Christian Schools, through your
education at The Catholic University of America (B.A.), The University
of Rhode Island (M.A.) and earning your doctorate in education from
Columbia University’s Teachers College in 1976. You told of your almost
accidental introduction to animal issues in 1974 when you were asked by
Christine Stevens (founder of the Animal Welfare Institute) to be on the
board that would advise the attorney general of the State of New York on
animal matters. This led to you also joining the board of the ASPCA,
which in turn led to you becoming president of the ASPCA in 1978, where
you remained for the next fourteen years. Following this you spent two
years at Guiding Eyes for the Blind before coming to the Humane Society
of the United States in 1994 where you remain the executive director of
the Wildlife Land Trust, a habitat preservation charity that was
incorporated as a separate 501(c)(3) organization by the Humane Society
in 1993. You spent the last twenty-seven years involved in some way or
another in animal welfare and the animal rights movement. In that
capacity, you obviously witnessed the transformation of that movement to
what it is today.

In this session we will explore in greater detail some areas you touched
upon in the first session regarding the growth of the movement. Let’s
start with how your feelings and views about animals evolved from
childhood. How did they evolve from childhood or early adulthood to the
time when you became president of the ASPCA? Why do you presently feel
the need to protect animals? Is it out of a sense of justice or more so
because they are sentient beings with rights?

Kullberg: I think, over time, we all have some idea of the impact of
events during our younger years on our mature adult years, especially
the influence of family and church and friends and environment. But we
never have a full sense of all of the pluses and some of the minuses
that shape us. So too is our understanding of what steers us in one
direction or another — our sense of this is sometimes correct and
sometimes quite idealized.

Having said that, I came from a strongly but, in hindsight, a sensibly
religious family. I had a brother who was a priest. His order was the
very moralistic Congregation of The Most Holy Redeemer (commonly
referred to as The Redemptorist Fathers). They were founded by a priest
in Italy named Alphonsus Liguori, who followed the strict moral
interpretations presented by Saint Thomas Aquinas in the Summa
Theologica (who, in turn, was most influenced by Aristotle’s use of
logic). Aquinas and Ligouri advanced the power of reasoning to determine
the most appropriate ways to act in life and to determine what behaviors
were ethically acceptable and which were not. As a young man I was
extremely influenced by this reliance on logic in large part because of
my great regard for my brother and, by extension, the moralistic and
sainted founder of his order who continued to have a strong influence on
me while, many years later, I was an undergraduate student at The
Catholic University of America.

I also had a grandfather who helped found the Swedish Congregational
Church in Providence, Rhode Island. My father left that church to marry
my mother, who came from a strong Irish Catholic background. Those two
religious traditions were quite influential during my teen-age years. I
went to a Catholic high school after having spent eight years in public
school. The spiritual difference between public and parochial schooling
for me at that particular time in my life was so profound that I decided
to dedicate my life to helping other young men by becoming a Brother of
the Christian Schools, the order of the teachers I had in high school.
All of these influences came into play when I decided that, at the age
of sixteen, I would leave home to become a Christian Brother.

I’m one of those people whom I don’t think could get up in the morning
were I not working for a cause. I don’t think I would have done well in
the for-profit sector as far as having the enthusiasm and the interest
to follow opportunities that exist solely to make money. To say the
least, I would not have been a good banker.

After leaving the Christian Brothers when I was twenty-four I became a
teacher and advocate for a Greenwich, Connecticut based organization
called the Baldridge Reading and Study Skills Services. My work there
allowed me over a two year period to travel to every state save Alaska
and Hawaii, which was a liberating antidote for someone who lived the
essentials of a monastic life for some six years. I left Baldridge in
order to complete in one year a masters degree in English literature at
the University of Rhode Island. I then taught for two years at Parkland
College, while chairing its English department.

Miles: And you were kind of pushed, I guess, into the animal cause.

Kullberg: Well, yes and no. As noted earlier, my experience at Parkland
College led to my becoming a Kellogg Fellow while pursuing doctoral
studies in college and university administration at Columbia
University’s Teachers College. The fellowship was intended to prepare
doctoral students for college presidencies, and to obtain such a
prestigious fellowship was no small achievement and honor. Having
completed my course work in two years I wanted to stay near Columbia to
complete my dissertation. Thus I applied for and was offered the
Director of Admissions position at Columbia University’s School of Law,
an appointment that was to last for seven years, during which time I
completed my dissertation. My time at Columbia evolved into an interest
in becoming dean of the School of General Studies, which was, for all
practical purposes other than tuition a community college within the
Columbia University campus.

I don’t think I ever would have become involved with the animal rights
cause were it not for the fact that I did a favor for Christine Stevens
(I read some testimony), Gretchen Wyler (I helped her search for legal
assistance and went on the ASPCA board) and Louis Bishop (I agreed to a
month’s leave of absence from a post doctoral fellowship at HEW to
become the ASPCA’s acting executive director while they conducted a
national search for a new executive director). But the more I understood
what that cause was, the more the extraordinary logic of this first
humane society in the western hemisphere being much more influential for
most people than it is even today became for me a very positive
interest. My administrative interests enhanced my interest in the
opportunity I was given some two months after I arrived to become the
executive director/president of the ASPCA. (I had already extended my
acting executive director role one more month.)

But the more I thought about accepting full time employment at the
ASPCA, the more I began to think that this was an interesting
opportunity in not-for-profit management. If I accepted the executive
director offer I’d have an additional opportunity to better understand
what goes on there and what must be done to remedy the several problems
that were driving it to bankruptcy on the one hand and lower and lower
public esteem on the other.

From the perspective of an administrator, I couldn’t go wrong. If I
failed to turn the ASPCA around, everyone would say “No one could have
saved it.” But if I could do something to turn it around, that would be
personally and publicly a major achievement. It would be the best test
to date of my administrative abilities. I soon thereafter accepted the
challenge.

I therefore resigned my federal government fellowship and moved back to
New York City to begin what was to be a fourteen-year preoccupation with
ASPCA interests and the animal rights movement.

My advice to my own children is to pursue a well grounded and
challenging liberal arts education while a college undergraduate. Become
acquainted with a broad field of learning, such as English literature,
because what you will have an opportunity to do professionally in a
changing world will inevitably benefit from the broadening insights only
a general, liberal arts education can provide. My ability to attract and
effectively respond to professionally challenging opportunities is of
some evidence in this regard.

Much in life is determined by opportunity. It may come in a way you
don’t expect. If you do not recognize opportunities, and/or if you are
not confident enough to pursue them you could well overlook the one or
two times in life that will really allow you to test your abilities and,
assuming success, have a truly positive and rewarding influence on
society. When I was a child I was taught that part of my responsibility
of an adult would be to give back to society, to do something positive
for society. Thus, at the age of fifty-five I was offered an opportunity
to run another extraordinary organization. Had I not been emotionally
and intellectually prepared for such an opportunity I would be
considerably less professionally, intellectually and emotionally
fulfilled. Just last week I heard that we may well soon consummate a
five year effort to bring hundreds of thousands of acres in South
America under the protective vigilance of the Wildlife Land Trust. In
the larger scheme of things, ten or even three hundred thousand acres
saved for wildlife by an organization such as the Wildlife Land Trust
isn’t going to solve the worldwide problem of disappearing wildlife
habitats, but it will help. We do what we can do.

I sometimes visit those who may only have ten acres of good sanctuary
land that they want permanently protected. During my visit we’ll discuss
why they want it saved for wild animals forever. Inspiring testimonies
come from these discussions. Someone said to me recently, “Listen, I
only have ten acres. If I had a thousand acres we’d be trying to protect
those thousand. But while I have only ten acres, I want you to help me
save these acres for the wild animals they will thereafter protect and
with whom I share my life. I have learned much from them, and they are
as much a part of my family as are my children. But more than my
children, they and their kin depend on my ability to save the land that
now provides them with a nurturing environment.” The what, how much, how
many — these are all important issues in protecting land for wildlife.
But even more, for me, is the reason why.

Miles: When was the Wildlife Land Trust formed?

Kullberg: It was incorporated in 1993 but remained essentially a paper
organization until I arrived in early October 1994 to become its first
executive director. And my arrival followed my response to a call from
Paul Irwin and John Grandy. John, a former president of Defenders of
Wildlife, ran the Habitat and Wildlife Protection Division of the Humane
Society of the United States. Paul asked me if I wanted to come to
Washington to run the new national land trust that the HSUS had just
incorporated. I was immediately and positively excited about the
possibility. It did not take long following two meetings with Paul, one
in New York and the other in Washington, for me to say yes.

When I left the ASPCA my hope was to find a leadership position with an
environmental organization. It had become clear to me that the issues
involved with air, soil and water would comprise the principal ways in
the future that we would be abusing each other as well as our planet’s
other co-habitating non-human species. And there wasn’t enough attention
being given to the unbreakable connection between the animal rights and
the environmental movements. One is the flip side of the other. To have
an opportunity to affect ways land trusts can provide safe and nurturing
sanctuaries for wild animals is very rewarding.

When I was a graduate student, if somebody told me that this was what I
would be doing at this stage in my life, I would have thought they had
ingested some mind impairing drug before we spoke. But in life we need
to come to terms with what abilities we have and then recognize and
pursue the best opportunities we can find to fulfill those abilities.
For me, chairing high school and college English departments, teaching
students throughout the country how to master their text books, running
the admissions office at the Columbia University School of Law,
obtaining a doctorate from that prestigious university, solving major
survival problems at the ASPCA so that it is now well prepared to
survive this new century, helping blind people by shoring up the
administrative side of Guiding Eyes for the Blind and now helping wild
animals and sanctuary property owners at the Wildlife Land Trust have
all been, for me, rewarding and challenging opportunities that certainly
have tested in often disparate ways the God-given abilities I was given
and tried to develop. For the most part, I have found the energies and
perseverance to appropriately empower the varied missions of the
organizations I have had the honor of leading and to fulfill the
expectations invested in me in the appointments I have otherwise had.

The issue of animal rights is as profoundly important in properly
understanding the mission of a land trust as it is in understanding the
mission of the Humane Society. Gary Francione and several others whose
reasoning I respect consider the problems we create for animals
predictable whenever we treat sentient life as owned property. Any
sentient creature that is treated as property has a good chance of being
abused. Slaves, for example, were and still are treated as property in
places where slavery still exists. Women, for a long time in our own
country, were seen as the property of their husbands for a long time in
our own country and still in some other countries, and their children
were the property of their parents. If I poorly care for my bicycle,
that’s none of your business. If I want to kick my dog, mind your own
business. As long as we treat animals as property their sentience will
be minimized and their potential for being abuse increases.

For me, a reverence for all sentient life rests on an understanding of
the intrinsic right that we and other sentient creatures share, the
right to live free from abuse. All other rights are derivatives of the
overall right not to be abused. My becoming a promoter of the philosophy
behind community college education was consistent with my recognition of
the shared right not to be abused. If I tell you that you can’t go to
college to further develop your talents and interests, it’s abusive
because whatever intellectual talents you have could well go to waste.
Your interest in preparing yourself for opportunities for social
service, for example, might never be realized. Being told you can’t
exercise and refine your talents and interests is nothing if not
abusive. But a public community college education, typically equal to
and often superior to what is being offered to freshmen and sophomores
at expensive universities (community college teachers are always degree
holders and never degree-seeking graduate students) is not expensive and
is available to everyone with a high school or a high school equivalent
education. A high school equivalent education considers, for college
credit, appropriate life experiences. (As is obvious, my promotion of
community college education remains alive and well!)

Looking back, if there is a recurring theme to my professional life
efforts and personal life interests, it is the desire to better
understand and then do something about alleviating abuse.

When you’ve been able to prove to yourself and others that what you have
done with your time and talents has helped those suffering from abuse,
then you are better prepared to recognize other opportunities to help
that may come your way. Now I’m involved with environmental issues, the
resolution of which has much to do with alleviating abuse. How we abuse
our shared resources is of singular importance. Based on what we know
about the harm caused by second hand smoke, for example, were I to light
up a cigarette while talking to you in my office, I would be abusing
you. If I say that this is my office and I’ll smoke that cigarette
anyway, I am disrespecting your right to clean air, which rests on your
right not to be abused. I could go on about the ways we have abused and
are abusing our forests, soils, wetlands and other water sources which,
when degraded or when they are absent harms those life forms whose
survival depends on nurturing natural resources. We daily prove our
unique role as the world’s most abusive species in ways we know as well
as in ways that many among us still do not understand.

Many among us do what they can do to counter abuse. Hopefully others
will follow who will do even more. Maybe over time more among us will
understand that we need to do more to counter abuse. President \[Bill\]
Clinton did much to actualize the potential of his office to protect
resources and mediate disputes irrationally driven by hate, the
handmaiden of abuse. Recently I added up how many acres of forests and
wetlands Clinton saved by presidential fiat. It came to more than
one-quarter billion acres. No president or congress has ever done more
to protect the environment, including Teddy Roosevelt. Many still
complain about what they perceived to be the mistakes and collusions and
chicanery that took place during his administration. But more than two
hundred and fifty million acres of land will be protected for future
generations because of him unless efforts now underway to rescind his
efforts succeed. If they do, that unfortunate success will be
unprecedented. And what does this have to do with abuse? Think of how
much photosynthesis can no longer take place and those millions of wild
animals can no longer be nurtured in lost forests and wetlands. During
the last century, worldwide, half of our wetlands and forests were lost
forever principally because of the mistakes, collusions, and chicanery
of humans who should have known better.

So we look for opportunities to do good, caring for our loved ones at
home and for those others who need our informed care wherever we are
provided with opportunities to be helpful elsewhere. I think I’ve been
very fortunate in seeing opportunities to be helpful and responding
appropriately. Some might say I’m an opportunist, and in a very real
sense I am. Had I followed a predictable path I would still be teaching
high school English today. But I do not think I would have been able to
do as much good nor do I think I would be as happy as I am at this time
in my life. As I look back on my career, the abuse issues I’ve been
involved with, the consequent animal rights issues, and the increasingly
important issue of adopting compassionate lifestyles have all made me a
better and more insightful person. Were I not prepared to take advantage
of opportunities to help others, I doubt my philosophic evolution would
have been as spiritually rewarding.

Miles: You said during our first session that animal rights is an
umbrella to all rights movements. During your time, I guess from the
ASPCA on, what interactions did you have with other movements like civil
rights movements or the feminist movement or even the environmental
movement in the 70s?

Kullberg: When I was at Columbia Law School I was contacted by an
organization in New York City called CATALYST that was committed to
helping women develop as professional co-equals with men. They asked me
if I would help them put a booklet together to help women who wanted a
legal education but were concerned about biases in admissions and during
and after law school. What advice would I give them? I responded with an
enthusiasm that led to my authoring a booklet that I believe is still
being used to encourage women to work to defeat bias in the legal
profession. At the law school it was also a time when the Black American
Law Students Association felt that blacks weren’t getting a fair shake
in admissions. I did all I could do at the time to enhance law school
opportunities through affirmative action for blacks, Hispanics, Asians
and women generally. The Asian law school association asked that more
admission opportunities be made available to Asians. In the greater law
school arena, a lot of conversations that I was privy to with other
heads of law schools and deans involved the need to have more positions
available for some people coming into the law school who, because of
past admissions standards and/or biases, didn’t otherwise have much of a
chance for admission.

When the Bakke challenge at the University of Texas took place in 1974,
affirmative action was, for the first time, seriously challenged.\[10\]
A white male student felt efforts to bring more women, blacks, Asians
and Hispanics into professional schools excluded those who had better
college records and admission test scores. The courts eventually found
for Bakke, and so law, business and other professional schools became
nervous about continuing affirmative action policies.

Having been involved in this issue early on at Columbia Law School was a
more positive opportunity for me than would have been the case were I
asked to continue the effort to bring in the finest and best among white
male applicants from the most prestigious of American colleges and
preparatory schools. Prep schools fed into the better colleges, which
fed into the best graduate schools. We really had to make an effort to
break this system that engendered class warfare in undergraduate and
graduate education. I nurtured the evolution of a defensible and
sustainable affirmative action program while at Columbia, one that I
believe is still in place.

Miles: What interactions did you see between the different groups,
between the animal rights groups and other social movements?

Kullberg: Part of the problem is that there still is not enough
interaction between the animal rights movement and other rights-based
initiatives. The large animal welfare groups were, interestingly enough,
principally led by white males even though their supporting members were
typically female. Jim Mason, who has for many years written about the
abuses endured by farm animals, early on pointed this out when he was on
panels at animal rights meetings, particularly when there were no women
on these panels. Even now, if you look at a typical animal rights
conference audience you don’t see many black, Oriental, and Hispanic
faces. We need to do more to correct this lack of minority group
interest. Their rights and abuse concerns are our concerns, and ours
should be theirs.

I think that some within the African-American community see the term
“animal rights” as a diminishment of their still incomplete efforts
vis-à-vis civil rights. As a consequence, for the most part they don’t
become involved, which is a serious problem for a movement that is the
umbrella for all rights movements. We have done a poor job of
ameliorating this problem.

Steven Wise, an animal rights lawyer who was on the Harvard University
faculty until this year, just published a book on a simian species
called bonobos. He is focused — as is Jane Goodall — on helping us
understand that the notion of intelligence and suffering and the right
to be protected from abusive humans indeed crosses species lines.
Chimpanzees share 99.9 percent of their genetic make-up with humans.
Steve Wise found that many bonobos have reasoning abilities greater than
that of many human children, and similar research recently extended this
finding to other simian species.

Recently some scientists concluded that a parrot has the verbal and
reasoning intelligence of a five- to six-year old human. Most people
would understandably laugh at that. But the data is impressive. Their
abilities to master a language and to apparently use language in
rational ways, is amazing. A five- to six-year old child can be pretty
rational. If this finding is correct (which in science jargon means
replicable) this discovery is nothing short of amazing.

Leaders of the animal rights movement initially failed to link animal
rights to human rights. Jane Goodall, Steve Wise and others have had an
important role in exploring this linkage by studying non-human animal
intelligence and emotions and comparing these findings to similar
attributes in humans. All animals, human and non-human, have a basic
right to be protected from abuse, and these findings should help many to
better understand and appreciate the umbrella role of animal rights.

I recently listened to Kojo Nnamdi interview Gary Francione on PBS
radio.\[11\] I have always liked Gary, albeit some of his lectures in
the past insulted the group he was lecturing to. He has a tendency to
take no prisoners. He can be less than patient with what I believe is
the intransigence that he sees in his audience and the lack of the
breadth of their vision. But he was superb in his interview with Kojo
Nnamdi and it should be added to the archival oral history of our
movement, if at all possible. He was convincing because his logic was so
unchallengeable. Our case for animal rights rests on much more than
bonobos and chimpanzees. It’s so much bigger than that. For many people,
however, the jump across the species barrier may always be limited to
bonobos and chimpanzees, and that, at least, is a start.

Miles: Is it too big of a leap?

Kullberg: Tom Regan’s The Case for Animal Rights, Jane Goodall, Steven
Wise and Gary Francione have helped and are helping us make the leap. If
Regan, Goodall, Wise, Francione and others were not making the case for
protective rights for at least one species, I think things would be a
lot worse in our attempts to help others appreciate and respect all life
forms. Once the case is convincingly made that one non-human animal
species should be afforded rights, it is not much of a leap to logically
and intuitively make the same case for many other animal species.

Miles: We’ll all work together.

Kullberg: We should all be working together to protect each other and
sentient life generally. Once you understand this you soon understand
why an animal rights philosophy is truly the umbrella philosophy for all
rights efforts. It’s the protective umbrella for all creatures being
abused – blacks, women, Hispanics, Asians, children, husbands, wives,
bonobos, chimpanzees, and koala bears, among others.

By the way, many people have ordained Peter Singer as the father of the
modern day animal rights movement, specifically because of his seminal
book, Animal Liberation. It was the litmus test early on. We would ask
someone if he or she read Animal Liberation. If the answer was no, we
would see them as shallow followers at best. Today, that litmus test is
a vegan diet.

The mother (as opposed to the father) of the modern day animal rights
movement is Christine Stevens, even though her organization has welfare
in its title. In the 1950s, for example, she published a book entitled
Animals and Their Legal Rights. The father of our movement is Albert
Schweitzer and his concept of “reverence for life.” His concern about
someone who would tear the wings off a fly is as much a treatise on true
compassion as anything else I’ve ever read (including the extraordinary
novel Black Beauty!).\[12\] In the greater scheme of things, harming a
fly appears to not be as big an issue as is the abuse downed cattle
suffer at stockyards. But in a very fundamental way it’s everything we
need to know. In retrospect, my sensitivity to abuse was the result of
the ethical shock that information on the Holocaust was for me,
degradations that we now know were not limited to Germany. Abuse affects
all species and to not understand this fundamental reality is to be less
effective in our joined efforts to counter abuse and its causes.

Miles: It has to start somewhere.

Kullberg: It’s important to be very concerned if you ever had such a
tendency yourself to harm a life form, even a fly. A child might be
tempted to tear the wings off a fly captured alive “just to see what the
fly would do.” That act, however, could be the beginning of blotting out
the compassionate lifestyle norm that protects all life. That’s why,
when I became involved in 1990 with the writing and publication of a
handbook on animal rights, what I insisted upon in addition to helping
readers to understand the case for animal rights was how we bring this
understanding into our own lifestyles. What can I do with my life
immediately and over time to demonstrate that I can have a lighter
footprint on the earth by living in a non-abusive, peaceful way? The
good news is that this handbook, published in 1990 by The Living Planet
Press, was bought by more than four hundred thousand people.
Unfortunately, that means that more than six billion people did not buy
it!

Consider the social prowess behind the peace philosophy espoused by
Dorothy Day and Colman McCarthy, who prides himself on being the modern
day promulgator of Dorothy Day’s ideas. McCarthy used to write
editorials for the Washington Post that addressed our need to protect
animals and the environment that nurtures them and us. He is still the
best speaker I know on the importance of a peace-based philosophy.
Colman McCarthy is one of the best proponents of an animal rights
philosophy precisely because he is one of the best proponents of the
peace movement. Animal rights is about peace — violence is opposed to
animal rights. You can only enhance your animal rights ethic with a
commitment to non-violence. The reverse is also true. Violence is
antithetical to animal rights.

Miles: The time you were in New York was the same time that Peter Singer
was also there. Were you able to attend any of his lectures?

Kullberg: Yes. Well, not just attend. At the ASPCA we had a meeting room
in the basement of our headquarters building. It was roach-infested,
which was a turn-off for many. We took extra care to clean it as best we
could so that Peter Singer would have a more suitable environment to
talk with those who read or planned on reading his book, Animal
Liberation. He’s a very pleasant person to meet with, no airs about him.
And his interest in the well being of all creatures was contagious.

Miles: Was this the first time you met him?

Kullberg: Personally, yes. Animal Liberation remains one of the best
ways to “meet” him. I was very taken with a lot of what Peter Singer
wrote about. I had spoken with him over the telephone, and he was also
close to Henry Spira. So here he comes, this savvy philosopher, to a
makeshift podium, speaking to whoever showed up in the tawdry basement
meeting room at the ASPCA. Everything he said was terrific, and from
what I could tell, everybody felt good about his message, which is so
simple. His examples are singularly persuasive, and the reinforcements
he provided for those of us who read his book were a delight. Learning
is achieved through reinforcement. I can tell you that we didn’t hear
anything said that evening that could not help but push us more and more
into a true animal rights ethic, even though Peter would argue that his
philosophy, technically, is not based on an understanding of animal
rights.

Miles: And nobody — when you invited him to the ASPCA, nobody at the
ASPCA had a problem with him, considering it was animal rights/animal
liberation versus shelter issues?

Kullberg: That’s a perceptive question. First of all, the people who
might think that under my administration the ASPCA was going in a
far-out direction probably never heard of Peter Singer. But there always
was that tension at the ASPCA. It was within the boardroom, and it
certainly was present among many of our staff. When I decided, for
example, that for parties on ASPCA property to celebrate someone’s
birthday or a holiday the food would be vegetarian, there was an uproar
from some, the boldness of which in some instances I still find
surprising. Now, I was president. I’m not going to be picketed by some
of my employees. But there were some people very upset with what they
saw as my pushing a personal agenda, i.e., my private lifestyle and
values on them. But my agenda was right for an organization dedicated to
ending animal abuse. And if they demanded a meat sandwich they could go
out and buy one at a local delicatessen. But no ASPCA money would be
spent on meat.

The ASPCA had a big fête one evening in New York City to raise money. We
had on the invitation announcing the gala the following sentence: “Out
of respect for our mission, we would ask that those attending not wear
fur coats.” Fortunately we were successful in getting this request
through a board of directors oversight committee, but unfortunately this
request has been omitted from such invitations since I left, which is a
disturbing sign.

At the gala we also had a vegetarian meal. Regina Bauer Frankenburg was
one of the most generous financial supporters of humane movement causes
during the 70s. When she died she left a bequest that helped the HSUS
purchase a building in Gaithersburg, Maryland that is now the de facto
headquarters of the Humane Society of the United States. Regina came to
the gala with several guests, having bought a table. She started hunting
me down as soon as she came in, furious that only vegetarian fare was
going to be served. She believed that at least chicken should be on the
menu. How could she invite her guests to join her for dinner and not
have at least chicken on the menu? I told her she could call the hotel
restaurant and get a special meal served from the hotel kitchen if she
felt so upset by our menu, but that if she stayed with the menu we were
providing she would be pleasantly surprised and her guests would eat
quite well without supporting the cruelties associated with meat,
including chicken. Some board members and others felt that in the future
we should at least have an alternative of fish on the menu. But that was
the early 80s. Today no humane organization needs to equivocate on
humane values. Enough people associated with the organization expect a
higher standard.

George Cave recently did a terrific interview in the Spring 2001 issue
of Animals’ Agenda.\[13\] In the interview he comments on why he
abandoned his leadership role within the humane movement. He hadn’t been
heard from for a long time. His interview comments paralleled some of my
own feelings just prior to my leaving the ASPCA. Run-ins with people who
should know better, such as Regina, can wear down one’s batteries.

Miles: George Cave was the founder of Trans-Species Unlimited?

Kullberg: Yes. George always seemed very uptight. He was not someone you
would seek out for casual conversation. As I mentioned earlier I met him
at a conference that Alex Herschaft put on in New Jersey. We sat down on
some steps while waiting for a session to start and just started
talking. I quickly got over his nervousness and thereafter enjoyed our
wide-ranging talk. He was very forthcoming, perceptive and bright, and
the more he talked, the more I liked him and what he so obviously and
sincerely stood for.

The experiences that led to George’s leaving Trans-Species were
analogous to mine when I decided to leave the ASPCA. In large part I was
losing some of my enthusiasm. There were limits to my role as president
there. But I was also losing some of my enthusiasm for the make-up of
some of the movement’s leaders in the early 1990s. I found a lack of
professionalism increasingly obvious and tolerated. It was meaningful to
me to read George Cave’s interview, which was accurate and articulate. I
hope we hear more from Cave in the future. We need him and his sharp
mind back.

The movement in the early 1990s was getting very self-righteous. To lend
some urgency to our need for humane victories during the last decade of
the twentieth century I came up with the idea of joining forces with the
Humane Society of the United States and the Massachusetts SPCA — the
three largest, and in most people’s minds, most conservative humane
organizations — to put together a humane mandate that we called the
Joint Resolutions for the 1990s by American Animal Protection
Organizations. After several meetings spent in wording the resolutions
and the whereas clauses, we finally established an activist agenda we
were proud to publish.\[14\] I signed it for the ASPCA, John Hoyt for
the HSUS and Gus Thornton for the MSPCA. We then sent these resolutions
to the heads of some three hundred other animal-based organizations and
asked if they would sign on for their organizations. More than one
hundred organizations found the resolutions helpful articulations of
what should comprise a humane activist agenda and signed on. These
resolutions still encompass the agenda of what we need to accomplish as
we start the new millennium. The resolutions put before its readers the
broadness of our humane concerns, especially to those who think our
agendas should only involve dogs, cats and possibly other creatures kept
as pets. It also demonstrated our leadership in articulating the
objectives we needed to accomplish in order to come ever closer to our
overall goal of ending human abuse of sentient life.

Miles: Did larger groups have problems with it?

Kullberg: Yes. When I attended the Summit for the Animals in 1991, the
annual meeting of the heads of animal rights organizations, I was proud
to demonstrate that the so-called conservative core of our movement had
taken a very strong stand on the need to protect not just on dogs and
cats from abuse but also farm animals, laboratory animals, work animals,
and every other category of animals who were vulnerable to human-caused
abuse. I enthusiastically presented the resolutions to the attendees. To
my surprise the head of the Friends of Animals, Priscilla Feral, let me
angrily know that she was very upset that the introduction to our
resolutions said that all signatories opposed threats and acts of
violence. Priscilla insisted that no one within our movement had ever
threatened others or had ever been violent. Priscilla made this
ludicrous point so strongly that the Summit Board deferred acting on a
resolution that the Summit join us and more than one hundred other
humane organizations in the pursuit of these important resolutions so
that we might better work together to diminish abuse during the last
decade of the twentieth century. These resolutions were printed as a
full-page ad in the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, and the
Washington Post. Unsolicited, they were also placed in the Congressional
Record after a New York Congressman, Charles Rangle, read them in the
New York Times. But they were too forthcoming in renouncing violence for
Priscilla and the Summit board that was then chaired by the current
editor of Animals’ Agenda, Kim Stallwood. For me, I had run into the
exposed nerves of competitive nonsense. My guess is that the resolutions
were too liberal for their determination of what should remain the turf
of those who believed conservative organizations should remain
conservative.

The introduction that so angered the head of Friends of Animals read as
follows: “In order to establish the 1990s as a decade of rapid progress
in diminishing the pain and suffering that billions of animals
experience each year in laboratories, on farms, in the wild, as pets, in
sports and entertainment, in exhibits and work situations, the
undersigned humane organizations, representing millions of concerned
American citizens, have adopted the following resolutions to promote and
guide both individual and joint efforts on behalf of these animals, who
are so much in need of our immediate and compassionate care and
protection.” The first resolution — and I won’t go into any more than
the first — addresses non-violence. Remember, I earlier said that, at
its core, the humane movement is a peace movement. “Whereas, the
foundation of the animal protection movement” (I would have preferred
“animal rights,” we settled on “animal protection”) “is that it is wrong
to harm others; and whereas threats and acts of violence against people
and willful destruction and theft of property have been associated with
the animal protection movement, therefore be it Resolved that we oppose
threats and acts of violence against people and willful destruction and
theft of property, and Resolved that we shall energetically work to
reduce as rapidly as possible the massive pain and suffering of billions
of animals through non-violent means.”

This is what our movement is still all about. Amazing still to me is the
fact that the Summit for the Animals had any difficulty at all with
this, including Priscilla. My respect for the attendees dropped several
notches, as well as my interest in remaining associated with a group of
leaders who were vulnerable to being so apparently browbeaten by one of
our own who was so clearly out of touch with reality.

Miles: Was she able to get past that and read the other resolutions?

Kullberg: No. I doubt that she read the whole thing. But I will tell
you, she came to that meeting very upset with this agenda against abuse,
an agenda that, if anything, was too tame in its presentation.

Miles: But her name wasn’t on it.

Kullberg: No. She had a previous opportunity to have her organization’s
name listed. We sent it to Friends of Animals. They didn’t sign on, and
they never contacted us concerning their belief that we erroneously
suggested the need for a non-violence declaration. I recall I walked
away from the podium thinking, “That’s it. I’ve given it my best shot. I
don’t believe this. These are the heads of so-called humane
organizations, after all. Can it be possible that they don’t see that
there’s been violence — that the English underground effort was just
then coming into the United States, where animals were being taken and
released, and laboratories being trashed, and some people complaining
that red paint had been thrown on their fur coats? Do they have their
heads stuck in the sand while saying, “No, these violent acts never
happened, and anyone who admits that they have happened is a traitor to
our cause”? Hopefully such idiocy would not happen today. I saw some of
the disillusionment within our movement that I was experiencing was also
experienced by George Cave, albeit for different but related reasons.

When Bill Clinton became president, the agenda he put on the table
included a lot of things that the Republican Party was saying should be
done. The first that comes to mind is the welfare issue, the end of
welfare as we know it. The Republican Party was furious — furious that
Bill Clinton would “steal” their issue. Perhaps when the ASPCA, the
MSPCA and the HSUS came out with very detailed goals for the last decade
of the twentieth century, some people were upset that these important
organizations could be so very forthcoming about issues that somehow
they believed they owned. I am reminded of my first meeting with Ingrid
Newkirk. To Ingrid’s credit, however, she cares more about the issues
than the messengers.

Ingrid didn’t like to share a platform. But my guess is that she
nonetheless thought it would be an opportunity to point out how PETA is
now the new and right organization to move an animal rights agenda
forward, and she could do that by demonstrating how conservative and
out-of-touch the ASPCA was. When that could not be accomplished during
our radio interview, to her credit she did not react with the
pathological myopia I saw in Priscilla.

Some organizations within the humane movement incorrectly try to present
themselves as different from all others and one of the reasons behind
this, I believe, is their need to dramatize their singular importance
for their direct mail appeals. We’re all dependent on financial support.
There has been a lot of hostility in this movement that I believe has
more to do with direct mail positioning than anything else. Progress
would come sooner were there less of this competitiveness in the future,
but financial considerations will probably continue to dictate
otherwise. We need to join arms and to understand that we each have both
different and similar opportunities to advance a better day for sentient
life and both different and overlapping opportunities to attract the
financial resources we need to survive. What we do not need to do is to
misrepresent and otherwise detract from one another.

Miles: But we’re all working for the same thing.

Kullberg: We should be working for the same thing, albeit sometimes in
different ways. I think it was good for the advancement of the humane
movement in the 1980s that I had the podium of the ASPCA.

\[End Tape 4, Side A; Begin Tape 4, Side B\]

Kullberg: Maybe that story of the Joint Resolutions for the 1990s is a
good example of just how things became strange for me toward the end of
my ASPCA presidency. Of course, that was 1991 and now it’s ten years
later. I and the ASPCA’s general counsel, Elinor Molbegott, were the
catalysts behind the 1990s Resolutions. I don’t see anyone coming out
with new resolutions for the first decade of the new millennium, and
that’s unfortunate. Many people, even some of those who are not friends
of animals, are interested in knowing with some clarity what we care
about and how committed we are to working with others to diminish the
abuse of animals, human and non-human, and the abuse of the resources
all sentient life needs to survive.

Miles: Has there been a change in the infighting amongst the groups over
the last several decades? Has it gotten worse? Has it gotten better?

Kullberg: I have not been at core of the animal rights movement for
several years. I’m now running a land trust and thus could not answer
that very important question with any precision. But there are
positioning battles still going on that are most unfortunate and
unnecessary. Good people are involved with these battles, and their
causes are good. But sometimes I think they do not care enough about the
negative fallout from their arguments as long as what they perceive as
their turf is protected. I say that with some strong admission that I
care for the people involved. But if you look at Farm Sanctuary and the
Humane Farming Association over some slights to do with strategies and
legislative goals, you can get some sense of the remaining problems.
Arguments that In Defense of Animals has had in the past with Animal
Rights International were similarly frustrating.

Miles: You had previously mentioned Jim Mason. When was the first time
you met him?

Kullberg: Well, again, going to these conferences —

Miles: It’s kind of an introduction to everyone.

Kullberg: It provided an introduction to most. I early on sensed the
importance of Alex Herschaft in this movement. His animal rights
conferences provided the best opportunity to see and meet the who’s who
of our movement. The problems inherent in the factory farming of food
animals needed more attending and Mason was researching and writing
about farm animals, especially after he left Animals’ Agenda, often at
great financial sacrifice. He’d do all this research, and sometimes the
disturbing information he uncovered didn’t get enough attention in the
press or in the publications of some of the humane groups he approached.
I always tried to support Jim. We had him do some monographs for us. I
hold him in extremely high regard as a person, a lawyer, a writer, and a
catalyst for change. I’m told he is also an excellent carpenter.

I recently went to a “no kill” conference that Jim Mason also attended.
There is tension in the movement right now concerning whether “no kill”
is diminishing the reputations of municipal shelters that must accept
all animals the public brings to them, and whether or not “no kill”
encourages people who suffer from zoophilia, who think life at any cost
is good and thus feel justified keeping animals in small cages, often
for months and even years while trying to get them adopted. Misery
inevitably ensues. But the “no kill” movement has to be better
understood, for it is too often misrepresented. When it’s working, it
works very well. It depends on good use of media and advertising and
common sense with regard to euthanasia when animals are unadoptable for
health and/or temperament reasons.

The most successful “no kill” organization has for many years been the
North Shore Animal League in Port Washington, Long Island (New York).
They’re very generous in sharing with other shelters their approach to
successfully adopting animals. They also provide grants to help other
shelters become more successful with adoptions. Behind the “no kill”
philosophy is more than \$200 million that Mr. and Mrs. Duffield,
founders of People Soft, a computer software company, put into in a
foundation now ably headed by Richard Avanzino. The foundation is called
Maddies Fund, in honor of the dog they adopted from the San Francisco
SPCA. The tension created when a new way is put forward to promote
animal adoptions serves no good purpose, especially when so much money
is now available to keep the “no kill” movement rational and effective.

Anyway, I met Jim Mason at a recent “no kill” meeting. We were talking
about nothing in particular when he turned to me and said, “John, do you
see who’s here? Look at the participants. They are older than those who
typically come to animal protection/animal rights conferences. They’re
dressed extremely well. And they’re really excited. They’re really,
really excited. This is tremendous. This isn’t like some of the
conferences we’ve gone to in the past where some of the participants are
seemingly always upset. These people are treating this conference as if
it were a revival meeting.” And it was that. It was like a revival
meeting. The “no kill movement,” at least as far as I can tell, is in
good hands.

One of the speakers used the Beatitudes of the New Testament as a
vehicle to get the crowd excited about what they have dedicated their
lives to accomplish, attracting good caretakers for animals in need of a
fresh start. His presentation sounded like a revival meeting indeed!

I guess tensions and disagreements will always exist within our
movement, especially when confronting individuals too content with
myopic visions of what they see our movement to be. We should be pleased
about what we’ve accomplished and much more aggressive in networking and
consulting with others to accomplish our goals more quickly and
effectively. One of the leaders in this regard right now is my friend
and colleague, Wayne Pacelle, one of the HSUS’s senior vice presidents.
His genius is well on display when he orchestrates animal friendly
ballot initiatives in states throughout the country. He takes on the
best funded efforts of his many opponents and he usually orchestrates
victories principally because he unites with others, from grass roots
volunteers to corporate heavyweights, and mostly because logic and right
is on his side. He networks better than a New York politician, he cares
deeply and his personal life is lived in harmony with his animal rights
philosophy. Merritt Clifton makes no effort to disguise his enmity with
Wayne and has used Animal People to repeatedly belittle him. Merritt has
some cause for his anger, but that should have dissipated long ago. This
is yet one more example of destructive tensions in our movement remains
unfortunate and a delight to our real enemies.

When Tom Regan’s Case for Animal Rights was published, I organized
weekly staff meetings (voluntary attendance at brown bag luncheons) to
discuss each chapter, as well as chapters in Michael Fox’s Returning to
Eden. Anyone who wanted to come to these discussions was welcome. The
veterinarian who supervised all ASPCA shelter programs, Lloyd Tate,
attended several of these luncheons. Lloyd was a loyal employee and,
over time, became a good friend.

Lloyd had a negative reaction to the concept of “animal rights.” He was
most offended when I would talk of animal rights as the umbrella of all
rights movements. We publicly debated several of Regan’s points, debates
that some saw as inappropriate for the president to engage in with a
staff member. We would openly and unabashedly argue with each other,
although never to the point where we would become truly upset with each
other. The fact that Lloyd was black made my interest in his views
greater than might otherwise have been the case, for I still believe
more blacks should be attracted to the animal rights movement. I thought
that if I understood Lloyd better I might have a better handle on
helping to make this happen.

After leaving the ASPCA, I lost track of Lloyd, other than our
exchanging holiday cards. Recently I spoke with him by telephone. I
brought up our debates. I said, “You know, Lloyd, one of the reasons I
wanted to have one-on-ones with you in front of groups was that they and
I needed to see that a black man could get behind animal rights. It was
very important to me, and yet you never gave me that satisfaction. By
the way, I’m glad you didn’t give in to my attempts to win you over to
my cause as a favor to me because unless you were satisfied with the
concept of animal rights and could get behind it, I did not want you to
give in.” So the problem clearly was Tom Regan’s and my failure to
articulate the philosophy in a way that gave Lloyd no option but to
accept it.

Lloyd, to my surprise, responded by saying “You know, John, I’ve been
thinking about you and our animal rights discussions lately and I’ve
been especially thinking about some things you said in the past. I’m now
beginning to see that you were right.”

I soon after received another call from him. He told me he had just
returned from an American Humane Association conference, where he
participated in a workshop on animal rights. Steve Wise of bonobos fame
was leading the discussion. He then volunteered the following: “John,
I’m on board. I am absolutely on board. I don’t know what took me so
long, but I’m on board. I want you to know that. Animal rights is what
it’s all about. It took awhile.”

Miles: Maybe his veterinary background — you had to put it in specific
animal terms. Is he still with the ASPCA?

Kullberg: He does some consulting work for them, and he’s done some work
for the London-based World Society for the Protection of Animals
\[WSPA\]. He has been to Taiwan to teach shelter staffs how to euthanize
sick and unwanted animals, which is very much needed. In some countries
objectively inhumane methods of ending an animal’s life are common. The
fact that Lloyd is still willing to take on the difficult task of
teaching others how to euthanized animals, albeit now supported by an
animal rights philosophy, which should serve him and his clients well,
demonstrates his willingness to pursue difficult assignments when he
believes in their importance, as part of his character I often depended
upon when I was president of the ASPCA.

Miles: You had mentioned the publication, Peter Singer’s Animal
Liberation. It seems that during each decade there were important
happenings in the movement. In ’81 the Silver Spring monkey case took
place. In 1990 there was the March for Animals. Did you see a resurgence
after these episodes of excitement in the movement? How was it
perceived?

Kullberg: I think the Silver Spring monkey case is a true marker for the
movement. It forced people to come to terms with abuse. The ensuing
exposé was the best thing that could ever have happened to the nascent
animal rights movement in this country at that time, as horrible as the
documentation was. People had to come to terms with the notion that some
scientists live by the standard that the end justifies the means. The
Silver Spring case forced people to come to terms with how badly many
laboratories that experiment on animals are run.

The impact of the Silver Spring monkey case is analogous to Sam
LaBudde’s work exposing how tuna are commercially captured. No one
believed what was going on in the name of fishing for tuna. Purse seine
netting and the drowning of thousands upon thousands of dolphins it
inevitably caused was permitted for decades because hardly anyone knew
what was happening. If you brought it up, many would pretend they knew.
But most did not know until LaBudde came back with the smoking gun of
these horrific videos. Wow! Bingo! Now we had a tuna industry being
given no option but to commit to not using purse seine netting in the
future. This was another pinnacle event in the history of animal rights.

The first March for the Animals in Washington, DC, sponsored by the
Summit for the Animals, was also an important event, albeit considerably
less so than its organizers had hoped it would be and hence, in my
opinion, no pinnacle movement event. Perhaps equally and even more
important were the various marches for animals over several years that
Richard Morgan orchestrated under the banner of Mobilization for
Animals, the organization he founded. He went all over the country
organizing these marches. On hindsight, they were less important for the
public than they were for those of us who were movement activists. The
Washington march in 1990 was supposed to impress the nation and even the
world with the strength of the animal rights movement. Quite the
opposite happened. Enough people didn’t show up to impress anybody. But
this and other marches for animals did something very important, and
that’s why in the future we should still have marches. The marches
brought activists together in a kind of liturgy to draw strength from
each other.

I think we have to have this kind of liturgy in the movement. You go to
church on Sunday or to a synagogue or ashram on a different day. Why not
stay home, say some prayers, have some reflection time, perhaps hug your
spouse and children, if present, and then get on with the day? While
this can be inspirational and even energizing, when you come to the
synagogue on Saturday or to church on Sunday or to an ashram some other
day, this coming together of many, including some strangers who share
our beliefs, imparts an energizing sense of a community effort for the
cause we espouse, and in the process we show each other that there is
hope for a better day.

Marches do this as well. They provided liturgy through their songs,
chants and speeches. We need to see who else is out there. We even need
to hug. We need to come among our fellow beings, knowing that we’re not
alone and surely that we are not the be all and end all for our
movement. We give witness by marching together that what we are about is
right and just and well joined. My God, I was president of the ASPCA.
How more important can you get? Way back then I was prepared to be
egotistically convinced that what I was doing to advance our cause was
obvious and unique. Then I go to one of these marches and I realize that
—

Miles: That you’re not the center of the universe.

Kullberg: Exactly: that I was not the center of the universe. Far from
it. The fact is we all need each other. We need others to teach us. We
need to hear those speeches. We need to hear others saying things about
preserving our universe and protecting sentient life. We need the
witness of others, that they can stand up and they can proclaim, “I
believe! I believe! This is what I believe in,” and then demonstrate why
what they believe in is important. So God bless Richard Morgan and
others who put Marches for Animals together.

Now, when you get behind the scenes, particularly with the various
Marches for the Animals, there was some rancor, some pettiness. There
was a well-intentioned man \[Gil Michaels\] on the west coast who was
then publishing an animal rights journal that was printed on glossy
paper. Laura Moretti, a professional editor and a person whom I admire
most for her truly caring demeanor, worked for him as the magazine’s
editor. The problem was that the magazine was quasi-pornographic in that
so much of the horror that was photographed up close meant that you
couldn’t have it sent to your home if you had children. I mean, do you
want your young children to see up close and personal on glossy paper
the photographically captured agonies of downers? The pages of this
magazine, more than any other I have encountered, presented lurid and
extremely upsetting pictures that well document human cruelty and
sentient indifference, but too well for very young children to deal
with.

But the publisher, new among movement leaders, thought he would change
the movement overnight. He hoped to be the power behind the first March
for the Animals. There was a lot of consternation at one Summit meeting:
“Who is this guy?” and “Who is he telling to do what and why?” The dream
that he envisioned had us attracting more than a hundred thousand people
to the 1990 march. In fact, we attracted less than ten thousand. But it
was successful for the participants if not for the public at large
because we came together. It could have been five hundred people there.
We were together, and that will always be an energizing happening.

Henry Spira was once at a Washington, DC meeting that was called to
discuss a bill we wanted Congress to pass regarding how farm animals
raised for food sources were to be killed. We had some interesting
people at this meeting, individuals who seldom had an opportunity to
come together. One was Dr. Temple Grandin. She is well known as an
autistic person who designs ways to bring animals into the slaughter
room that are more humane than what would be the case were she not
consulted with and listened to. The cattle industry respects her, as do
most of us who have reflected on her contributions to lessen the
suffering, fear, and terror cattle and sheep endure during the last
moments of their lives.

After this meeting we all went out to dinner, about eight to ten of us.
The dinner was like the march. We shared spiritual sustenance with each
other. I once had a similar luncheon with Laura Moretti. Although we
never met before we talked for about three hours because we realized,
amazingly so for a first meeting, that we could enter a mutually
strengthening and spiritual place, and we enjoyed exploring our insights
and caring commitments with each other from that place. I came away
better understanding why this movement is so important to me and to her.

I see this as empowerment. Our batteries get charged. God, we need that,
because there is a lot of discouragement when you look around and you
see the level of abuse, the problems that still exist and the resistance
to much needed change that cannot be defended but nonetheless remains
entrenched and persistent.

Progress is being been made, but not enough and not quickly enough. If
you look at the agenda the Humane Society of the United States has taken
on as overviewed in that organization’s annual President’s Report,
regardless of whether you love the HSUS or not, you have to stop, take a
look, and say, “Wow. This one organization is doing all this?” But at
times it still seems that we are woefully behind and that we are losing
to those abusers who do not care the ethical battle we are waging in
defense of those whose future existence is in our hands.

The most influential book I ever read in this movement was not Animal
Liberation or The Case for Animal Rights. It was Dr. Michael Fox’s
Returning to Eden, which was published in the late 1980s. Michael
effectively addressed the many ways animals are abused. He also made a
compelling case for animal rights. John Hoyt, then the HSUS president,
gave him the opportunity to write that book as a statement of the
problems facing this movement and what we really must understand and if
we want to make a real difference for creatures and their environments.
If you talk with Michael Fox today however, you probably aren’t going to
charge your batteries a whole lot. He has a rather dark view of the
survival of the human race because of our intransigence as abusers.

Miles: I think he’s been in the movement now for decades as well, and it
seems like the people who have been in the movement since the 60s and
70s, if they haven’t taken a break from it to kind of get away from it
for a while and, as you said, recharge, it just can be a little — you
just get burned out.

Kullberg: Yes, albeit less so for those who have been unable to get away
from it and nonetheless still remain effective and up-beat.

To say the animal rights movement is the umbrella movement for all
rights causes brings you front and center with every rights-related
cause that’s out there. I recently wrote a letter that was published in
the Washington Post, taking to task William Bennett for the way he
treated the writer/commentator, Michael Kingsley, who founded a web site
journal called Slate.\[15\] I took Bennett to task because what he wrote
lacked compassion and had several errors. Bennett sets himself up as an
ethicist who is going to tell us who’s good and who’s bad. To me, my
writing that letter to the Washington Post about the inexcusable way
Bennett treated another human being is the same as my being asked to do
an editorial for an animal rights publication. Abuse is abuse. This
truly spiritual movement is life — all life — encompassing. We should
each get ourselves into some of the broader areas of abuse and become
ethicists who are on the alert for abuses going on that other people get
away with unless someone among us is willing to spend whatever time is
necessary to take them on. Writing letters to the editor can help
clarify an issue and is a very good way to have impact.

Miles: You had mentioned that your first meeting with Henry Spira was
when he had organized a protest of the ASPCA’s use of the decompression
chamber. Since then you grew into a mutual working relationship and a
friendship. A lot of people have very strong views on how he approached
issues and his impact on the animal rights movement. How do you feel
about Henry Spira?

Kullberg: I admired and appreciated the good in Henry. Henry spent as
much time explaining his strategic approach to bringing about desired
change as he did explaining what he accomplished, and he had good
formulas. There were a number of very important people in this movement
whom he was close to, one being Peter Singer. Peter applauded Henry’s
vision, and he helped Henry. Henry would go around and ask people for
their advice. He, in fact, was very flattering. As I noted earlier,
you’d talk to him and suddenly he’d take out a notepad and copy down
something you had to say.

Henry wanted to see progress. He devised ways to effectively counter
institutionalized abuse. That’s the approach of the woman I admire most
in this movement, Christine Stevens, as well as the approach of Wayne
Pacelle. You can scream at the sinners and demand purity all you want.
But it’s probably not going to come because it’s too much to expect
that, overnight, a charlatan will become a monk, whether you’re a high
level corporation executive or a lower level policy enforcer. While
Henry was always willing to discuss the possibilities, he was not beyond
threats to get his way. He’d go to a meeting with an already prepared ad
that he would show to the assembled powers-that-be and say, “I don’t
want to spend the money to place this in the New York Times, but if we
can’t come to an agreement I will. Just tell me you’ll make some
sensible changes in your approach to using animals to advance your
company goals. Then we’ll put this ad aside.”

Elliot Katz, the head of In Defense of Animals, took tremendous issue
with some of Henry’s approaches and boasts. I think what bothered Elliot
most was the fact that Henry made progress with Procter & Gamble. I
believe that at least in part Henry was seen by Elliot as someone who
was diminishing the financial returns he hoped to get from his direct
mail attacks on Procter & Gamble programs. Henry was saying what a good
job Procter & Gamble had done, primarily in response to Henry’s efforts,
to make changes and commitments that would benefit animals. Henry was
upset and angry about what he saw as Elliot’s unjustified accusations
against Procter & Gamble after that company’s commitment to reform. So
there was unresolved antipathy between the two of them which is yet
another example of two good people taking each other on publicly to no
good end.

Henry could work a crowd beautifully. He’d go to a reception of chemical
engineers and, with his little notepad, get names and telephone numbers.
Then he’d come back to his New York City apartment and devise ways to
get these people to think about the animal research or testing agenda he
was working on and get them to help. He did this very well. How could
you not like Henry? You had to applaud the efforts he made and the
successes he had. He was uniquely successful in this regard.

Miles: Absolutely. You mentioned Priscilla Feral. Did you also have any
interactions with Alice Herrington at Friends of Animals?

Kullberg: Oh, yes. Alice and I early on during my presidency of the
ASPCA met and even occasionally shared some radio broadcasts. But Alice
was at the end of her career. She was not ready to see the ASPCA as
anything but the vessel of problems that she battled against in the
past. It was difficult to win her over.

In an attempt to do that I once joined a picket line she set up at a fur
show at the New York Coliseum. I didn’t tell her who I was until I had a
chance to spend time picketing. I then let her know that I was there to
support her and the Friends of Animals’ efforts to take on the furriers.
We had an acceptable relationship after that, but it was not one that
was going anywhere in the future.

I knew Helen Jones similarly from a couple of meetings that John Hoyt
put together. John has a tremendous way of bringing people together. He
is very gifted and very caring and the minister in him often showed, as
it does also in Paul Irwin, his successor at the HSUS. John had great
affection for Helen Jones, in large part because she was one of the
people who broke away from the American Humane Association to help found
the HSUS. But I saw Helen at the end of her time also. I never really
was able to develop much of a relationship with her.

Miles: How has the media’s coverage of the movement changed? Have you
seen any changes in the media’s perception of the movement and its
activists?

Kullberg: I think “animal rights” is in the public lexicon now and,
despite the best efforts of institutionalized animal abusers, the term
is in the process of being more coherently understood. The problem that
we have is that it still lacks universal definition, and our enemies
often try to make ludicrous references to it. We need to be very clear
about what animal rights means. Thus the reason for my seizing every
opportunity I have to say “Animals have a right not to be abused.” This
self-evident understanding is very important to get across, for it
includes adults, children, and non-human animals. What does not abusing
a child mean? What are the subheadings of the rights that a child has
not to be abused? I would suggest they might be mental, physical, and
emotional, under which headings we could list dozens of ways a child can
be abused and thus his or her right to be protected from such abuse.
These common sense considerations can also be nuanced to apply to a
spouse, to the disabled and, yes, to dogs, cats, laboratory animals,
wild animals, animals raised for food, and so forth.

Some of the early Disney movies were actually very good at introducing
and reinforcing the importance of a multi-species ethical system based
on respect for and thus protection of all animal life. Several years
before my tenure as its president, the ASPCA presented its most
prestigious annual award to Walt Disney. He came forward and accepted it
and then took his seat without ever saying a word. Almost everyone was
surprised and disappointed. I think that what he was doing was making
the point that if anyone in the audience wanted a comment, simply
recalling his treatment of animals in Bambi, Cinderella, Snow White and
other Disney movies should suffice.

Now Chicken Little, Dr. Dolittle 2 and some other animal-focused movies
make respect and reverence for life comments more directly and, for
many, more persuasively. Gretchen Wyler is doing a great service in
honoring actors, producers, reporters and even musicians with her Ark
Trust Genesis Awards. Newspaper reporters covet a Pulitzer Prize.
Actors, producers, and some reporters who put animals in a good
non-anthropomorphic light increasingly covet a Genesis Award. Because of
good pieces on animals in various media outlets people increasingly have
come to understand that animals due our protection and respect now
certainly do include more than dogs and cats.

The rise of vegetarianism as the logical alternative to foods that are
products of cruelty is also being helped by disclosures about farm
animal production and its consequences from organizations such as the
Farm Animal Reform Movement, the Physicians Committee for Responsible
Medicine, the Humane Society of the United States, the American Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Animals’ Agenda and Animal
People. Government and foundation-sponsored studies that disclose the
health risks we face when we ingest animal fat and consume
animal-sourced foods such as milk, eggs, and cheese are also helpful to
those in need of a little push to become vegetarians. There’s something
in the newspaper every week now about meat and dairy health risks. These
disclosures have forced people to come to terms with alternative diet
choices and with more appropriate ways of helping and protecting
animals. But we have a very long way to go. Worldwide each year some
forty-four billion food animals suffer, mentally and physically, because
of our food preferences and our government’s promotion of cruel dietary
choices. Of special note in this regard is the publication of a book by
the Chairman of the Board of the HSUS, Dr. David Wiebers. His book is
entitled Stroke-Free For Life.\[16\] and in it he advocates a vegetarian
lifestyle. I am very optimistic about the future of the HSUS under his
vegan-inspired board leadership.

The most important commitment that we need to encourage in others today
is the adoption of truly compassionate, non-violent lifestyles. To not
agree that all animals have a right not to be abused is to miss out on a
profound understanding of what our role should be as the biosphere’s
most controlling species.

It is helpful, in this regard, to entertain the concept of Gaia, our
Earth Mother. When you are abusive to this nurturing parent we should
expect a reprimand of varying degrees of severity. What we must
increasingly do, given the abuse we and other members of our species
continue to inflict on the life dependent resources our earth mother has
given to us, is to treat each other and all creatures in ways consistent
with our most compassionate insights. The Joint Resolutions for the
1990s, if revised for the first decade of the twenty-first century,
unfortunately would not be very different. There are more of us than
there were a decade ago, and we continue to impart heavy footprints on
the earth. Thus, while advocating more humane and caring lifestyles for
others, we must also do all we can to give witness in our own lives to
the truly compassionate lifestyle we wish to see in others.

Oleg Cassini is now promoting a line of faux-fur coats and accessories
that have the look and feel of real fur. Is this a good thing? Isn’t
this encouraging fur coats again? In response, a pin was designed that
says, “Compassion Fashion.” Those who acquire a Cassini faux-fur garment
are now being asked to attach this pin to it. But in doing so, are we
really protecting fur bearing animals? It seems to me a better choice
would be to discourage everyone from wearing any fur, fake or otherwise.
If God wanted us to have leopard markings on our backs, we would have
entered the world as leopards.

So furs are now back in fashion, in part, I believe, because in
providing fake ones as attractive alternatives you also inevitably
promote the beauty and luxurious feel of genuine furs. And then
hypocrisy often — too often — reigns. The pin promoting fake furs can
also be worn on real furs, if only to stave off the specter of red paint
being thrown on your coat by an animal rights activist who,
unfortunately, has yet to pledge to a no exceptions non-violent
lifestyle.

Miles: Ten years from now where do you think the movement will be versus
where you would like it to be?

Kullberg: That’s a tough one. I don’t know. In large part I don’t know
because I’ve been trying to come to terms with environmental problems,
and that arena is increasingly bleak. It will be the way we treat the
environment that will ultimately do in animals, not individual acts
against individual animals. It could well be that the move to a
non-violent diet, and thus a more energy-efficient food system, will
help to turn overall attitudes around from myopically selfish to broadly
caring. Perhaps the environmental movement will do more to help shape
social policies that encourage and reward more compassionate lifestyles.
We have to have less of a negative impact on the earth, particularly
when our human population may double within the next fifty years. That
is the challenge that will ultimately make things better or worse for
all animals, human and non-human. All depends on how we, the dominant
species, respond to the increasingly dire warnings about the
increasingly irremediable consequences of the carpe diem lifestyles most
humans continue to practice.

Miles: In your role with the Wildlife Land Trust do you — I assume you
work with a lot of environmental groups. What is your interaction with
them and how do they perceive you since the Trust was founded by the
Humane Society of the United States, which is typically seen as an
animal protection, not an environment protection organization?

Kullberg: Attending meetings with other conservation-minded groups can
be useful but these are not very efficient expenditures of our time
right now. We’re trying to get people to see us as the only national
group that has a non-violent commitment to protect wild animals. The
commitment to never hunt or trap wild animals, either recreationally or
commercially, on any sanctuary property that we protect either through a
conservation easement in this country, a conservation easement-like
agreement internationally or on any property we own outright is our
paramount interest. You’re not going to find other national and
international land trusts making this commitment because they view
sanctuary management as one that should allow the killing of animals
when they are perceived as having negative impacts on food, water, and
the sanctuary’s preferred fauna and flora. We believe that, for the most
part, sanctuary lands will take care of themselves, and that
overpopulation will ultimately control itself when food is less. Should
animal-related problems come to our attention that need remediation, our
interventions will be non-violent. Thus, the Humane Society’s role in
founding the Wildlife Land Trust represents an appropriate and long
overdue decision to further its goal of protecting all sentient life
from abuse. It remains surprising that other large humane organizations
have yet to follow the Humane Society’s lead here.

We humans have placed our principal residences and farms and vacation
homes in many places where the consequences inevitably lead to crowding
out what wildlife we have left. People then see wild creatures as pests,
rather than life forms whose ancient lands we co-opted. It’s like
another “get rid of the Indians” sort of thing — get rid of the deer,
get rid of the groundhogs, this land is mine now. But by what ethical
right?

Miles: I’d like to also mention that on November 17th of last year you
were given an award by the Pegasus Foundation. I have written here that
the Pegasus Foundation was established in 1997. It’s a private,
independent foundation that funds environmental and animal protection
programs. The awards were established to acknowledge outstanding
achievement in the environmental and animal protection community.
Specifically you were honored for your leadership in habitat
preservation through your work with the Wildlife Land Trust. What does
the Wildlife Land Trust require of people who are going to donate their
land or a conservation easement to you?

Kullberg: First of all, after landowners contact us in order to explore
the possibility of forever protecting their lands as natural habitats
for wildlife, we respond by sending each landowner an exploratory
questionnaire. Once we receive completed questionnaires I arrange to
meet these people and preliminarily evaluate their land. The larger the
piece of land, the better. But we’ll accept small plots also, depending
on what their interests are and what their lands are adjacent to. It
takes me very little time to come to terms with the appropriateness of
land as a permanent wildlife sanctuary. Since we’ve lost half of our
worldwide forests and wetlands during the last hundred years, we don’t
want to lose any additional wildlife-nurturing land even if the land in
question is only a few acres in size. If we can save sanctuary land, we
do it. Then I discuss the possibilities with the landowner to make sure
that we’re what they want and that their stewardship principles coincide
with our own.

We are everyman’s land trust, in that if a landowner agrees with our
protective principles, i.e., that there will be no recreational or
commercial hunting on the property or trapping, no commercial forestry,
and no further development other than what exists now or what is
modestly planned for the future, then we are prepared to move forward as
their wildlife protective partner. We are also prepared to absorb all
the costs that may be required to legally ensure that their property
remains a wildlife sanctuary forever. We’ll do a title search. We also
prepare a baseline study which documents everything existing on the
property should there ever be a dispute later. Everything on the
property is photographed as it is today, thus allowing us to prove in a
court of law, if necessary, that this is what the sanctuary property was
when we accepted the responsibility of permanently protecting it and any
deviance from this must be constructively addressed, no matter how
expensive such a correction might be.

We then draw up an agreement for a conservation easement or, when
requested, a letter of understanding to accompany a transfer of title to
us. The owners of the property are encouraged to have their lawyer fully
review the agreement document to ensure that it fully reflects the
conservation interests of his or her clients. Only then do the owners of
the land proceed to finally donating their property to us or donating an
easement on the property. Under a conservation easement arrangement they
continue to own the property but they have given up, for themselves and
for all future owners, any and all rights to recreationally or
commercially hunt, trap, develop, or log the property. After those
essential rights are surrendered, we’re very flexible in trying to get
any other protective interests they might have addressed. And we will go
anywhere on earth if we believe we can be effective in protecting land
from violent human incursions.

Miles: Are Wildlife Land Trust-protected properties mostly in the United
States?

Kullberg: The number of sanctuaries we protect are mostly in the United
States, but in volume of acres most of the land we protect is abroad.
One of our sanctuaries is a 42,000 acre island in the Romanian-owned
portion of the Danube River. There is a possibility of our soon having a
role in protecting more than one hundred thousand acres in South
America. We are now protecting some ten thousand acres in Belize. In
South Africa we have protection responsibilities for some fifteen
hundred acres. More than five hundred acres of sanctuary land is now
protected by us in Canada. Overall we now protect some sixty thousand
wildlife-nurturing acres of land on fifty-six sanctuary properties in
four foreign countries and nineteen American states. If something came
up in Mainland China and it looked like we could really arrive at an
enforceable agreement with the Chinese and we could find a local
caretaker there to protect that land according to our requirements, we’d
be there in a heartbeat. We live in a global economy and to remain true
to our protective mission we must be prepared to effectively respond to
the global needs to save sanctuary land wherever possible.

We’ve been very successful in fund-raising principally because of our
involvement with a sweepstakes program. For several years we’ve been
netting about a million dollars a year from sweepstakes. Because of this
I am able to spend my time meeting with landowners rather than
introducing myself to potential money donors. So far, so good. To run an
effective organization, you have to attract money. Good intentions are
simply not enough. So my charge as executive director is to raise money,
save sanctuary land for wildlife, and otherwise represent, in an ethical
and environmentally appropriate way, the overall nurturing and
protective interests of the Wildlife Land Trust.

Thus, I don’t have a lot of time to network with other land trusts. But
I do send our newsletter to every land trust in the country. Less than
one-half dozen land trusts are national and/or international. Some
twelve hundred are community, state or regionally based. We go to one
networking meeting a year, which is called the Land Trust Alliance
Rally, to listen to and learn about what is going on in other land
trusts and access some training that might help us to more effectively
accomplish our program goals and further staff professional abilities.

I’ve been marketing the Trust principally through public service radio
announcements. This year, Jane Goodall narrated these announcements, and
we have sent compact disc recordings of her reading these sixty-,
thirty-, twenty-, and fifteen-second appeals to some three thousand
radio stations nationwide. We’ve also prepared a Jane Goodall-narrated
television PSA that will be distributed early next year.

The ethical foundation of what we do is the most rewarding part. To be
working in an arena as well as living a life where ethics is king means
everything to me.

\[End of Session\].

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

academic and education profession 5–6, 7–9, 60–61

affirmative action 8, 60, 61

Afghanistan 52

African-Americans 61, 70–71

Alaska 56

American Humane Association 39, 70, 75

American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) 12–28,
30–37, 41, 42, 44–50, 55–58, 60, 63–65, 67, 68, 70–72, 74–76

Americans with Disabilities Act 45, 46

Amory, Cleveland 11, 38, 39, 41–43

Animal Liberation \[book\] 33, 40, 62–64, 71, 73

Animal People \[magazine\] 41, 70, 76

Animal Protection Institute 39

Animal Rights Handbook 48

Animal Rights International 68

Animal Rights Mobilization! 42, 65

animal rights movement/animal protection community 10–11, 34–35, 38–44,
61–62, 65–70, 71–75

animal shelters 15, 24

no-kill shelters 69

Animal Welfare Institute 1, 11, 55

Animals and Their Legal Rights 12, 33, 63

Animals’ Agenda \[magazine\] 65, 66, 68, 76

Aquinas, Saint Thomas 55

Ark Trust 12

Genesis Awards 76

Avanzino, Richard 38, 69

Baldridge Reading and Study Skills Services 56

Barnard, Neil 30

Beatrice \[dog\] 43

Belize 79

Bennett, William 74

Bergh, Henry 14, 21, 22, 25, 35, 44, 49

Bishop, Louis 16–18, 56

Black American Law Students Association 60

Black Beauty 63

Black Panthers 38

Brach Foundation 40

Brothers of the Christian Schools 1–3, 6, 55, 56

Brown, Robert 38

By What Right? \[book\] 12

Califano, Joseph 17

California

Sacramento 39

Cambodia 38

campaigning/lobbying 69–70, 74–75

Canada 79

Caras, Roger 50

Case for Animal Rights, The 33, 40, 62, 70, 73

Cassini, Oleg 77

CATALYST 60

Catholic University 2, 55, 56

Cave, George 42, 43, 65, 67

China 79

Clifton, Merritt 41, 70

Clinton, Bill 59, 67

Columbia University 7, 18, 32, 38

School of Law 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 16, 56, 58, 60, 61

Teachers College 7, 55, 56

Women’s Law School Association 8

Congressional Record 66

Connecticut

Greenwich 56

Cooke, Charles \[brother-in-law\] 10

Cooke, Marjorie Kullberg \[sister\] 1, 10, 11, 16, 33

Davis, Frederick 34

Day, Dorothy 63

decompression chambers See euthanasia

Defenders of Wildlife 58

demonstrations and protests 32–33

Denmark

Elsinore 4

Dictaphone Corporation 7

Dinkens, David 13

discrimination 7–9, 45–46, 60–61

Disney, Walt 76

dogs 44–45

dolphins 43, 71

Duffield, \_\_\_\_\_\_ 69

EarthVoice 50

Educational Testing Service 9

Elsberg, Daniel 10

environmental issues/environmental movement 27–29, 53–54, 57–58, 59–60,
77–80

ethics and morality 26–32, 43, 49–50, 51–53, 55–56, 58–59, 63

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

euthanasia 13, 18–20, 32–33

decompression chambers 13, 18, 19, 21, 32, 33, 35

sodium pentobarbital 18–20

T-61 19

factory farms 40, 53

Farm Animal Reform Movement (FARM) 38, 76

Farm Sanctuary 68

Federal Bureau of Investigation 10

Feral, Priscilla 66, 67, 75

fishing 29–30, 43, 71

Fitzgerald, Pageen 23

Florida 5

Fox, Michael W. 31, 33, 38, 40, 41, 50, 70, 73

Francione, Gary 59, 62

Frankenburg, Regina Bauer 64, 65

Friends of Animals 66, 67, 75

Fund for Animals 41

funding/finance 12, 15–16, 22–23, 34, 35–37, 46–49, 64, 67, 69, 79–80

fur 64, 75, 77

Germany 63

Ginsburg, Ruth Bader 7

Goodall, Jane 43, 61, 62, 80

Grandin, Temple 73

Grandy, John 53, 58

Great Britain

London 71

Greenpeace 29, 53

Guiding Eyes for the Blind 44–46, 53, 55, 58

Harvard University 61

Hawaii 56

Herrington, Alice 75

Herschaft, Alex 38–42, 65, 68

Hevassi, Alan 37, 46–48

Hidden Persuaders \[book\] 2

Hoover, J. Edgar 10

Hoyt, John 34, 38, 50, 65, 73, 75

Humane Farming Association 68

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 34, 39, 42, 51, 53, 55, 58,
64, 65, 67, 69, 73, 75, 76, 78

Illinois

Champaign 4

In Defense of Animals (IDA) 68, 74

Iraq 31

Irwin, Paul 53, 58, 75

Johnson, Norman 19

Joint Resolutions for the 1990s by American Animal Protection
Organizations 65, 68, 77

Jones, Helen 38, 75

Katz, Elliot 74

Kayatt, Ed 23

Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts 10

Kingsley, Michael 74

Koch, Ed 35, 48

Kullberg, Evan \[son\] 50, 51

Kullberg, Karol Marie Runing \[wife\] 16, 50, 51

Kullberg, Katherine \[mother\] 1, 6, 16, 56

Kullberg, Kathryn \[daughter\] 50

Kullberg, Kristen \[daughter\] 50

Kullberg, Marjorie \[sister\] See Cooke, Marjorie Kullberg

Kullberg, Paul \[father\] 1, 3, 4, 7, 16, 56

Kullberg, Warren \[brother\] 1, 3, 55

Kyoto Treaty 29

La Salle, Saint Jean-Baptist de 1

Laboratory Animal Welfare Act 10

LaBudde, Sam 43, 71

Land Trust Alliance Rally 80

law and legislation 7–9, 14–15, 36–37, 46–48, 60–61

Lefkowitz, Louis 11

Liguori, Alphonsus 55

Living Planet Press 63

Lusky, Louis 12

Maddies Fund 69

managing an organization 14, 15–16, 18, 20–22, 25, 35, 46–49

Mannes, Donald 15

March for Animals 71, 72

Maryland

Gaithersburg 64

Germantown 50

Mason, Jim 38, 40, 41, 61, 68, 69

Massachusetts

Boston 1, 41

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)
34, 65, 67

McCarthy, Colman 63

media 42, 75–76

Miller, Brad 38

Minasian, Stan 43

Mobilization for Animals 71

Molbegott, Elinor 68

Moretti, Laura 72, 73

Morgan, Richard 38, 71, 72

Mouras, Belton 38, 39, 40

Museum of Natural History 33

New Jersey 65

New York 11, 12, 14, 15, 21, 37, 47, 49, 55, 66

Albany 37

Barrytown 2

New York City 1, 6, 7, 10–15, 17, 18, 21–24, 32, 33, 35–37, 41, 46–49,
57, 58, 60, 63, 64, 70, 75

Port Washington 69

New York Times 10, 11, 48, 66, 74

Newkirk, Ingrid 38, 42, 67

Nnamdi, Kojo 62

North Shore Animal League 69

O’Banyon, Terry 5

Our Town \[newspaper\] 23

Overpopulation of Cats and Dogs \[book\] 47

Pacelle, Wayne 69, 70, 74

Pacheco, Alex 35, 38, 39, 50

Packard, Vance O. 2

Parkland College 5, 7, 56

Pegasus Foundation 78

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 38, 42, 67

People Soft 69

people with disabilities 45–46

Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM) 30, 76

Pre-Law Handbook 9

primates 61

Procter & Gamble 74

psychological aspects 31–32

public relations/outreach 23–24, 25, 32–33, 79–80

Rackow, Herbert 18, 19

Rangle, Charles 66

Raphael, Sally Jesse 42

Regan, Tom 33, 38, 40, 62, 70

religion 51–53, 55–56

Christianity 1–4

Returning to Eden \[book\] 31, 40, 70, 73

Rhode Island 1, 41

Cranston 1

Pawtucket 3

Providence 2, 4, 56

Romania 79

Roosevelt, Theodore 60

Rosbach, Susan 20

Russenberger, Jane 44

Saint Raphael Academy 3

San Francisco Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 69

Schiller, Marvin 35

Schmidt, Benno 13

Schnapp, Max 11

Schweitzer, Albert 32, 63

Scott, George C. 43

Sierra Club 29

Silver Spring monkeys 35, 71

Singer, Peter 33, 38, 40, 43, 62–64, 71, 74

slaughtering of animals 73

Society for Animal Protective Legislation (SAPL) 1

sodium pentobarbital See euthanasia

South Africa 79

South Carolina 42

spaying and neutering 24

Spira, Henry 32, 33, 34, 38, 39, 41, 64, 73–75

Stallwood, Kim 66

Stevens, Christine 1, 10–12, 16, 33, 38, 43, 55, 56, 63, 74

Stevens, Roger L. 10

Stroke-Free For Life \[book\] 76

Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) 38

Summa Theologica 55

Summit for the Animals 40, 42, 66, 71

T-61 See euthanasia

Taiwan 71

Tate, Lloyd 70

Teamsters Union 18, 47

Thornton, Gus 34, 65

Trans-Species Unlimited See Animal Rights Mobilization!

U.S. Department of Agriculture 41

U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare 10, 17, 20, 56

U.S. Food and Drug Administration 19

United Nations 28, 29

University of Illinois 4, 5

University of Maryland 51

University of Rhode Island 4, 55, 56

University of Texas 61

veal calves 27

vegetarianism 25, 29–31, 50–51, 64–65, 76

veterinary medicine 24

Vietnam 38

violence towards animals and humans 66–67

Virginia

Arlington 18

W. K. Kellogg Foundation 7

Wall Street Journal 66

Washington Post 10, 63, 66, 74

Washington, DC 2, 10, 16, 18–20, 39, 58, 71, 73

Westminster Kennel Club 48

Where Have All the Dolphins Gone \[film\] 43

Wiebers, David 76

wildlife (in general) 28, 40–41, 53–54, 57–58, 77–80

Wildlife Land Trust 28, 40, 53, 55, 57, 58, 77–80

Wise, Steven 61, 62, 70

women and animals 61

working animals 44–45

World Bank 29

World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) 71

World Wrestling Federation 26

Wright, Duncan 17

Wyler, Gretchen 11–14, 16, 17, 23, 56, 76

Yale University 13

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[1\] Vance Oakley Packard, The Hidden Persuaders (New York: D. McKay
Col, 1957).

\[2\] Now the Department of Education and the Department of Health and
Human Services.

\[3\] Louis Lusky, By What Right? A Commentary on the Supreme Court’s
Power to Revise the Constitution (Charlottesville: Michie Co., 1975).

\[4\] Animal Welfare Institute, Animals and Their Legal Rights
(Washington, DC: AWI, 1978); 4th ed., 1990.

\[5\] Michael W. Fox, Returning to Eden: Animal Rights and Human
Responsibility (New York: Viking, 1980).

\[6\] Peter Singer, Animal Liberation: A New Ethic for Our Treatment of
Animals (New York: New York Review, 1975; New York: Avon Books, 1977).
Tom Regan, The Case for Animal Rights (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1983).

\[7\] Marjorie Anchel, Overpopulation of Cats and Dogs: Causes, Effects,
and Prevention (Conference Proceedings, New York State Humane
Association, 1987, (New York: Fordham University, 1990).

\[8\] Copy attached. See especially pp. 115–118.

\[9\] The Animal Rights Handbook: Everyday Ways to Save Animal Lives
\[writing and research, Laura Fraser, et al.\] (Los Angeles: Living
Earth Press, 1990); copy attached.

\[10\] Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265,
98 S.Ct. 2733, 57L.Ed.2d (1978). A white male who was denied admission
into a state medical school challenged the legality of the institution’s
special admissions program under which 16 of 100 positions were reserved
for disadvantaged minority students.

\[11\] Gary L. Francione, “Introduction to Animal Rights: Your Child or
the Dog,” Dec. 21, 2000, interview by Kojo Nnamdi, host of “Public
Interest,” WAMU-FM, syndicated by National Public Radio.

\[12\] Anna Sewell, Black Beauty, the Autobiography of a Horse
(Cleveland; New York: World Publishing Co., 1946) \[many editions\].

\[13\] Copy attached.

\[14\] Copy attached.

\[15\] Copy attached.

\[16\] David O. Wiebers, Stroke-Free For Life: The Complete Guide to
Stroke Prevention and Treatment (New York: Cliff Street Books, 2001).
