---
---

This edited transcript is the product of a tape-recorded interview
conducted by Martin Rowe with Sandra Larson in Boston, Massachusetts on
December 3, 1999 for Recording Animal Advocacy.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 - December 3, 1999

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

1

A biology major in college; interested in becoming a veterinarian –
Growing up with many companion animals – Moving to Arkansas and working
for large animal veterinarian; experiences with cows and factory-farmed
chickens – Working at microbiology laboratory – Moving to Massachusetts
in 1977 and working in Joslin Diabetes Foundation’s Harvard laboratory
on tissue culture, etc. – Shocked by the laboratory’s use of pound dogs
– Starting Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)’s
petition campaign to repeal pound seizure law in Massachusetts –
Continued to be employed by laboratory; reaction of colleagues – Joining
CEASE activists at NEAVS’ annual meeting in 1980; differences between
members of CEASE and NEAVS – Serving as a board member under Judge
Robert Ford’s tenure as NEAVS president in the 1980s.

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

Planning NEAVS’ campaign to repeal pound seizure law; remaining at
laboratory during campaign but finding it very hard emotionally –
Leaving laboratory after campaign to start school educational programs
for NEAVS; resistance from Massachusetts Teachers Association to
programs – NEAVS’ advertising campaign against Gillette’s animal testing
– Involvement with and thoughts on People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals (PeTA)’s attempt to take over NEAVS in late 1980s – Working on
dissection campaign for NEAVS – Starting the independent Ethical Science
and Education Coalition in 1990 – The importance of NEAVS having a
scientific arm and of approaching the scientific community as
professional scientists.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

December 3, 1999

Boston, Massachusetts - New England Anti-Vivisection Society

Session of 1-1/2 hour

Interviewer:

Martin Rowe (author, editor, publisher)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor:

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Larson and Melinda Everett \[NEAVS’
Director of Media/Public Relations\]. Lee prepared the introductory
material and index, except for the biographical sketch which was
supplied by NEAVS.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Sandra Larson majored in biology as an undergraduate, planning to become
a veterinarian. A certified biology teacher, she also once worked as an
assistant to a large animal veterinarian and subsequently as a
microbiologist at a large corporation that manufactured blood products
for culture media.

After moving to Massachusetts, Larson worked as Senior Research
Assistant at the Joslin Diabetes Center. When she realized that many of
the animals in the labs came from pounds in Massachusetts and New
Hampshire, she joined with other grassroots activists, visiting town
councils in Massachusetts, urging them to stop selling “their” pound
dogs to research labs.

Larson was later appointed to the NEAVS Board of Directors and became
one of the primary organizers of NEAVS’ Campaign to Repeal Pound Seizure
with the goal of “making pound seizure a household word in
Massachusetts.”

Following the success of the campaign, Larson proposed starting a humane
education program for NEAVS. She also happily resigned from her job at
Joslin. Larson’s educational program, the LivingEarth Learning Project
(LELP), presented nearly 1,000 programs in humane education at more than
350 schools in New England and New York every year.

In 1989, Larson moved to Connecticut but continued to work for NEAVS as
an educational field representative. She and Connecticut resident Pat
Butterfield formed the Ethical Science Education Coalition (now named
the Ethical Science and Education Coalition), providing a grassroots
series of presentations to boards of education urging that students be
allowed to choose non-animal methods to learn anatomy.

Larson now operates an animal sanctuary in Connecticut.

Sandra Larson

December 3, 1999

Boston, Massachusetts

Martin Rowe, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Rowe: This is Sandra Rae Larson, born on December the 2nd, 1950, in Los
Angeles XE "California:Los Angeles" . I’d like to ask you about your
passage into studying biology and microbiology XE "science/scientific
community" . How did you get into thinking that this is what you wanted
to do as a profession, and how did you — were there any changes in where
you considered biology as a profession?

Larson: The reason I majored in biology as an undergraduate was that I
was planning on going on to veterinary school. So I wanted to have a
broad science background and I figured that biology would be the way to
do that. During the course of study I met a woman who actually worked at
a VA hospital. Sometimes at night I would go in and visit with her.

Rowe: I’m sorry. A VA hospital is?

Larson: Veterans Administration. I would go in and sit with her, and she
would show me things under the microscope and all kinds of different
bacteria. I became fascinated with that study just by sitting with her.
Needless to say, the veterans had some pretty interesting things to look
at under the microscope \[that\] some of them brought back from here and
there in the world.

So I decided when I was applying to veterinary school that I would go on
and also work on my master’s. At the time my husband moved to Arkansas
XE "Arkansas" . He was transferred in his job. That’s when I worked for
the large animal veterinarian, at the same time applying to vet school
and working on my master’s.

Rowe: Why had you wanted to become a veterinarian before you switched to
biology?

Larson: I told my mother when I was five — I don’t remember this but she
tells me that I wanted to be a veterinarian. I think in my child’s mind,
and obviously growing up, even into college, was the way that I thought
I could best serve animals. I had many, many companion animals growing
up. That’s what I wanted to do, was to work with them. I guess at that
time it was the only way I could conceive of spending my life working
with animals plus getting a paycheck XE "veterinary medicine" \\r "vet1"
.

Rowe: Were your parents interested in animals? Did they love animals? Is
that why you had so many companion animals?

Larson: My mother loves animals very much, and my father at first
tolerated and then he also became pretty involved. But my mother is the
one. She basically allowed me to pretty much bring home whatever I
dragged home and to keep it. Most of my animals lived into old age. I
was responsible for caring for them. So that was my goal, was to go to
veterinary school.

Rowe: Were there lots of stray animals in your area where you were?

Larson: We lived in a peninsula south of Los Angeles XE "California:Los
Angeles" when I was in high school. It was very rural. Most everybody
had horses. There were some strays. In fact, both of the dogs we had we
picked up in parking lots. The other ones — I can’t even remember how we
acquired some of them. They were just waifs that happened to come our
way.

Rowe: Did you keep them all or did you kind of adopt them to other
people?

Larson: I think that because we had quite a bit of land there that I
ended up keeping most of them, although there were a few that were
adopted out. I think we were one of the first people in our neighborhood
— now this was in the very early 60s before it was at all fashionable or
even encouraged to have your animals spayed XE "spaying and neutering" —
that we did. That was my mother’s idea.

Rowe: Were you interested in companion animal issues like homeless
animals or you just wanted to care for them and protect them? Was there
anything systemic about your understanding of why there were so many
strays?

Larson: No, not back then. There really wasn’t much that was in the
newspaper or literature back in the 50s and 60s, especially early 60s,
because I don’t even think that the major humane societies were really
doing much of anything back then. I think the very first thing that I
saw — although I was very protective of animals, I have to say. We had a
bully in our neighborhood who used to shoot birds with his BB gun. I
remember taking him to task on that one day. At least he never did it in
front of me again.

Rowe: Did you find yourself unique in that neighborhood in that regard
or did you know other people who took in animals or were concerned? Did
you surround yourself with people who were concerned about animals?

Larson: No, I did not. There wasn’t anybody that I knew of that did
that. It was — my friends liked animals but they weren’t drawn to them,
I think, in the same way that I was.

Rowe: So you then moved in profession from being a veterinarian to being
a microbiologist in your interest. Then you moved to Arkansas XE
"Arkansas" working for a large animal veterinarian. What did you do?

Larson: I have to say that I wouldn’t trade that experience for anything
in the world. First of all, for me it was a complete culture shock
because I was born and grew up in California XE "California" and then
was — right after I graduated from college I was thrown into this
completely different culture. At first I really resented being there
because it was so different.

Rowe: In that?

Larson: Well, the accent, for example. The climate was extremely hot and
humid where I had never experienced that. In L.A. XE "California:Los
Angeles" , for example, the weather is always beautiful. The insect
species that abounded there were disgusting for me. \[Laughter\]. They
had furry ants and they had these hornets that would chase you across
the parking lot. It took me, I would say, a good year to appreciate my
surroundings. After the first year I absolutely loved being there
because I had accepted it for what it was and the good parts, and there
were many good parts, good things about living there.

As far as working for the veterinarian, I had approached a number of
vets in my area to see whether I could basically work there — it would
be nice to get a paycheck — but even if not to volunteer just to learn,
to get experience working with a veterinarian XE "veterinary medicine"
\\r "vet2" .

Rowe: This was still when you thought you might want to be a
veterinarian yourself?

Larson: Most definitely. Most definitely.

Rowe: Now, being a large animal veterinarian you would be helping horses
but you’d also be helping cows and other farm animals.

Larson: Pigs. Exactly.

Rowe: So what was your feeling about that. It’s obviously a leading
question. You’re being asked about farm animal welfare and working to
maintain the health of animals that are going to be killed. What was
your understanding about that at that time? What were your feelings
about it?

Larson: It’s interesting that I sort of got exposure to all the animal
issues in the things that I’ve done before I started working for NEAVS
XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" \[New England
Anti-Vivisection Society\]. I remember disagreeing with the veterinarian
and being absolutely horrified by some of the things I saw there. Now,
keep in mind this was the first veterinarian to ever have set up
practice — to ever set up practice in this county, so very backward.
Maybe that’s not the right term, but definitely not medically oriented.
They were sort of folk medicine. They would not talk to me because women
didn’t become vets or do field work in vet medicine. They thought I was
strange because I wanted to be a veterinarian.

Rowe: Did they think it was strange because it was a dirty messy
business, that women with their oversensitive feelings might not
understand?

Larson: That was very much part of it but also I think that they were
somewhat embarrassed because they were all men running the farms, that
issues of reproduction and calving and that kind of thing XE "cows" ,
they were embarrassed to talk to me about. It was no big deal to me. But
pregnancy testing and cows. And to be graphic, I spent many an hour
trying to push cows’ uteruses back in after they had pushed them out in
calving. It was just part of the experience. It was a dirty job. I have
to say, looking back on it, I think during that time I think it would
have been very hard for a woman to go into that particular field at that
particular place because you have to have a lot of strength to deal with
those big animals.

Rowe: But you were thinking of doing that.

Larson: I wanted to go into veterinary medicine.

Rowe: But not with large animals.

Larson: Not large animals. I loved being around them. In fact, I have a
cow and I have three horses XE "horses" and a goat right now. In fact,
just the other day a veterinarian came out. I was all alone, my husband
was gone, nobody was there. My horse severely injured his leg. He was
bleeding all over the place. This woman vet came out and she was about
half my size, and the two of us — and this is a draft horse now — had to
try to sedate him, keep him cornered while she could spend an hour
stitching up this wound. It was difficult.

Rowe: But your concern was XE "factory farms" \\r "ff1" , “I’ve got to
help this one individual animal right now XE "chickens" \\r "ff1" ,” but
whatever happens to that animal is some\[thing\] you didn’t think about
or wasn’t your concern or the whole process where these animals were
kept. Presumably being in rural Arkansas XE "Arkansas" , it wasn’t
factory farming anyway. It was more small farming, or was it not?

Larson: The chickens were definitely factory-farmed. I had never seen
anything like that. In fact, the town that I lived in was the
headquarters for Tyson XE "Tyson Foods Inc." \[Foods Inc.\], which is a
huge poultry concern. I was horrified by it because I had had chickens
growing up and they pecked around in the dirt. They were free.

I think the worst thing that I saw there was seeing an adult cow XE
"cows" de-horned — she had very large horns — with no anesthesia. I just
stood there with my mouth open. I felt so bad for this animal because
she was bawling so loudly that her tongue was turning blue, her eyes
were bulging out of her head. I thought — I said to the veterinarian
afterwards, “Why don’t you give her any painkiller?” He said, “Oh, they
don’t need that.” It was sort of like, “What are you worrying about? We
do this all the time. This is just a way of life.”

Rowe: How did you have access to the chicken factory?

Larson: I would go there with the vet when there was a problem
somewhere.

Rowe: So large animals doesn’t mean — large animal basically means
livestock of whatever form.

Larson: Right. Pigs. I used to milk his goats, but I don’t think we ever
saw any goats that were sick.

Rowe: And presumably you still ate them XE "vegetarianism" .

Larson: Yes. Isn’t that incredible? You know —

Rowe: Reflect a little back on that time, the feelings that you had
about these animals and your behavior.

Larson: I think I never made the connection. I think it was because I
didn’t want to. I think people can really deny themselves just into
oblivion. I never thought about it, never thought about becoming a
vegetarian even though I saw these horrendous things. In fact, \[I\] did
not become a vegetarian until 1980 when I started working in the
research lab. I just never gave it a thought, never gave it a thought.

Rowe: Let’s move on to there XE "business corporations" \\r "bus1" . You
became a microbiologist XE "science/scientific community" \\r "bus1" .
You worked in a microbiology \[lab\] of a very large corporation. What
were you doing there?

Larson: I was overseeing the microbiology lab. The company is one of two
very, very large corporations in the United States that manufacture
media so that you can grow bacteria and viruses. They would market blood
products where you could grow different kinds of microbes or you could
do tissue culture with these kinds of things. Of course, they maintained
a farm to get these blood products from. I would make sure that each and
every lot of media that went out to a hospital, for example, did what it
was supposed to do, because if it didn’t you’re talking about someone —
a human, of course — a human’s life that could have been jeopardized if
these things didn’t work.

In fact, I was fired eventually from that job because there were lots —
lots meaning not “many” — but lots of media that as far as I was
concerned did not pass and didn’t work and I thought should be thrown
out. The president of that particular chapter of the corporation
overrode my decision, and I would not sign it, and he fired me. And one
year later he was sued because people died because of the media he was
sending out. But I refused to do it. I was there about ten months and
was fired from that job.

Rowe: Where was that based?

Larson: That was in Tucson XE "Arizona:Tucson" , Arizona.

Rowe: Had you moved there because of your husband’s work?

Larson: I had obtained my master’s degree while he was working in
Arkansas XE "Arkansas" . Then he took one year off to get his master’s.
It was a one-year program at Arizona State XE "Arizona State University"
\[University\]. So I got that job in Tucson XE "Arizona:Tucson" while he
was going to school.

Rowe: What was his work?

Larson: He was working for OSHA and his field was safety, Occupational
Safety and Health Administration XE "Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA)" . That’s what he was interested in. In fact, he
was working in Arkansas XE "Arkansas" for Bechtel Corporation XE
"Bechtel Corporation" , which is a very large worldwide construction
company.

Rowe: So he worked there and then you got a job at Harvard XE "Harvard
University" .

Larson: Right. Then my husband and I split. He went back to Bechtel. I
was still in Tucson XE "Arizona:Tucson" . After a couple of months I met
someone who was from New England and he had been living there. He said
he was homesick and he wanted to go back to Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" . I said, “Great. I’ve always wanted to see New
England.” So we moved to Massachusetts in a van with two cats and all of
our possessions. It sounds sort of hippie. I was a big hippie in those
days. Anyway —

Rowe: We’re talking about in the mid-1970s?

Larson: Correct. Actually it was the end of ’77.

Rowe: Did you get a job fairly quickly at Harvard XE "Harvard
University" ?

Larson: Yes, I did. We arrived in November of — actually November of
’77. I got the job in December after applying.

Rowe: This was a dream job for you?

Larson: Well, it was a dream job until I found out the reality of the
job.

Rowe: What was the job and what was the reality of the job?

Larson: The job was working — I actually worked — let’s see if I can
explain this XE "medicine/medical community" \\r "med1" . There are many
hospitals in the medical section of Boston. There’s Beth Israel and
there’s Brigham and Women’s and there’s Deaconess and there are many
hospitals in that area. There are people who work at the medical school
who also have labs in various parts of those hospitals.

So the lab — we had one lab at the medical school and we had another lab
at the Joslin XE "Joslin Diabetes Center" Diabetes Foundation, which is
the largest diabetes research center in the world. That’s where our
other lab was. That’s where I spent a lot of my time. We were working on
amino acid metabolism as it concerned diabetes and the physiological
process in the body. I did all of the tissue culture, all of the
virology, and all of the bacteriology of that lab. There were five teams
there. We were working —

Rowe: Let me just step back again. The tissue culture, you mean human
tissue or was it animal tissue XE "animal experimentation and testing"
\\r "exper1" ?

Larson: No. Some of it was animal tissue, some of it was human tissue.
Some of it was frozen cell lines that are carried over from year to
year. Some of it was freshly harvested, as we say, cells that were put
directly into tissue culture, into culture.

Rowe: How long was it before you realized what was going on at the
diabetic lab? Just please describe what was going on.

Larson: The other — all of the different groups, except for the clinical
lab where they just saw human patients — were using animals XE "dogs"
\\r "dog1" . We had dogs there XE "laboratory animals" \\r "dog1" , we
had rabbits, rats, and mice. Our team was — other members of our team
were using all of those animals. I guess just by happenstance I happened
to be upstairs, which is sort of interesting that if you walk into the
clinic and you go into the elevator it will say that there are five
floors in that building, but there are actually six. The elevator
doesn’t go to the sixth floor where the animals were kept. The only way
you can get there is to go to the fifth floor and have a special set of
keys to go up the stairs to where the animals are.

I ended up going up there just because I was sort of snooping around XE
"animal pounds:pound seizure” \\r "pound1" . I guess the first thing
that — I think the real clincher here that really got me involved in
this whole thing was the dogs that we were using. The dogs were pound
dogs. This was before pound seizure was repealed in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" . So all of our dogs were once people’s pets. I would
have to go over there to the Harvard XE "Harvard University" lab, which
is where the dogs were, and sit there for an entire day while this poor
dog stood in a sling \[a restraint device\]. There was blood taken from
the dog at various time intervals. The dog was not allowed to go out and
go to the bathroom or to drink or to eat or to move during that whole
time. Then of course, at the end the dog was killed and muscle tissue
was taken from the dog, which was what then I would put in tissue
culture.

Just watching those dogs inspired me. I testified before the Public
Health Department when they came down here from Washington. I described
one particular dog that I wanted to adopt. In fact, I said, “I really
want this dog at the end.” I couldn’t stand it. Of course, adopting the
dog was impossible because they were going to take tissue from this
animal when it died or when they killed it.

Rowe: You must have known. Did you sense that something was wrong or
something was happening when you first joined the lab, or was this a
blinding revelation to you?

Larson: I knew that animals were used there. I knew that I wasn’t going
to be using them because of what I did. But I also didn’t realize the
way the animals were treated. I didn’t realize that I was going to have
such contact with them. The discovery was sort of an ongoing process.
The longer I was there, the more I discovered. I started asking
questions like, “Where do you get these dogs?” “Oh, they come from
pounds in New Hampshire XE "New Hampshire" .” “Oh.”

Rowe: Which is true.

Larson: Absolutely it was true XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp1" .
They also came from pounds in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" . So that
sort of — that really started to get to me. In fact, when we first
started the campaign I was still working for the lab, still working in
the lab, and at night when we did the first round of campaigning, which
is where we would go to a different town every night, we would present
information to the town councils, trying to appeal to them to stop
selling their dogs in their particular town in Massachusetts to research
labs. After Harvard XE "Harvard University" found out what was happening
and what NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" was
doing, they started sending people to these meetings as well. So I was
there and they were there. Very soon they found out my real feelings. It
was amazing they still allowed me access to the labs.

Rowe: Let’s just step back. You saw this material — you saw this
happening. You were very shocked. What did you want to do? You wanted to
stop experimentation completely? You wanted better conditions for the
animals? You just wanted to do something?

Larson: At that particular point, I definitely wanted them to use no
pound dogs, because I hadn’t been exposed to the other dogs yet, to the
dogs that were purpose-bred. No pound dogs to be used. I wanted the
animals to be cared for in a more humane manner. It wasn’t until I
really joined one of the local groups that I found out what was going on
in other labs. Then I became an anti-vivisectionist.

Rowe: Which of the local groups did you join and how did you approach
them?

Larson: It’s interesting. There were three things that happened all
around the same time that just swept me into the movement. One was
seeing a TV commercial in which Loretta Swit XE "Swit, Loretta" was
talking about veal calves XE "veal calves" and all the things that were
going on with them. I had no idea. The second thing —

Rowe: Even though you used to be a large animal veterinarian?

Larson: Right. But I never saw veal calves like that. I guess they
didn’t house them like that. I don’t know. It was weird. Again, not
making the connections or not wanting to make them.

The local humane society was recruiting in my area, which I joined XE
"animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r "arm1" . But
then the real thing — the real, real thing that got me involved was I
was coming out of work one night and I was standing waiting for the
light to change. There was a poster on the telephone pole. It had a
picture of a primate in a restraint device and it said “Stop animal
torture” or something on that line. “Come to the meeting at
such-and-such a place on this date.” So I copied it down and I went to
that meeting.

Rowe: This was in 1980?

Larson: This was in 1980, yes.

Rowe: What was that meeting?

Larson: That was a CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and
Exploitation (CEASE)" meeting.

Rowe: Citizens to End —

Larson: — Animal Suffering in Experimentation. This was very much a
grassroots group in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" and very, very
active — a very active group. So I went to the meeting and was somewhat
just sort of putting my toe in the water. I sat in the very back and I
listened to everything.

Rowe: What was your impression of the activists?

Larson: Very passionate, not crazy or anything like that but just very
passionate about what they were talking about, very knowledgeable, it
seemed to me, very action-oriented. “Okay, we’re going to do this, this,
this, and this, and we’re going to do this demonstration and then we’re
going to get this particular brochure out.” Very, very action-oriented,
very devoted.

Near the end of the meeting I got up the courage to raise my hand and I
said, “I’ve never been to one of your meetings. I work in a research lab
at Harvard XE "Harvard University" .” Every single head turned and
looked at me like I was a monster, which, of course, in their eyes I was
at the time. “Wait a minute! I really care about” —

Rowe: How did that make you feel?

Larson: It made me feel like — it made me feel pretty bad, actually XE
"psychological aspects" . \[Laughter\].

Rowe: Did you feel resentful? Did you feel —

Larson: No XE "law and legislation" \\r "law1" . I did not feel
resentful XE "animal pounds:pound seizure” \\r "law1" , not at all XE
"campaigning/lobbying" \\r "law1" . I felt guilty. I felt very guilty.
But that was what was meant to be. I joined that group. I worked with
them. That was the group — from that group was the initial six people
who signed the petition at the state house in Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" — I was one of them — to start the petition
campaign to repeal pound seizure. Just great people.

Rowe: What was the further involvement with that particular campaign?
What did you do particularly?

Larson: I became involved — oh, with that campaign.

Rowe: Which is, after all, if I’m reading this correctly — your
fundamental aim was to stop pound dogs from being used.

Larson: Right.

Rowe: At that point you were not anti-vivisection. Your aim was
specifically on this course.

Larson: Right. And for better treatment. I haven’t even talked about how
the rabbits were treated there. I was the one, because I was a
scientist, to go to all of these town meetings. Every night I would go
to a different meeting. We would drive to a different town and speak on
behalf of the animals that selling pound animals is not what the town
needs to be doing.

Rowe: What was the response of the people or the townsfolk who turned
out to your — and how many of them were there that turned out for the
meetings?

Larson: There were probably an average of maybe ten to fifteen people at
each meeting. Some of the towns — I believe there are 310 towns in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" , as I recall. I think during that time
period that we were doing that, which lasted about a year and a half, we
got — I believe it was about 70 towns to pass their own ordinance that
they would not sell their dogs to research, or their cats for that
matter.

Rowe: Did you visit all of those towns, all 310?

Larson: I visited — no, no, no. No, I didn’t.

Rowe: Because you were still working.

Larson: I was still working, yes. They were long days.

Rowe: And Harvard XE "Harvard University" let — as you said, allowed you
to continue working there until almost the end XE "medicine/medical
community" \\r "med2" .

Larson: I had thought about that because XE "animal experimentation and
testing" \\r "med2" , you know, the cat was out of the bag, so to speak.
They knew what I was doing. But I figured that if they fired me that I
would go after them for firing me without cause, because I did my job
very well. That was the plan, but they never did.

Rowe: Was that arrogance on their behalf, do you think, or just proper
employment policy?

Larson: Oh, gee, I don’t really think they cared much about proper
employment.

Rowe: What I’m trying to say is — I mean, this is early days in the
animal advocacy movement, especially the vivisection movement with so
direct inside information. They were ignorant of the possibilities of
getting the word out about what was happening?

Larson: Yes, because the ALF \[Animal Liberation Front XE "Animal
Liberation Front (ALF)" \] wasn’t breaking into labs at that point.
Nobody had changed their locks. I think that they figured that I was
sort of a drop in the bucket at that point. Although when I left that
lab I think they really regretted not firing me. I guess that was what
gave me the courage, the guts, to just do what I was doing because I
just said, “Well, if they fire me then I’m going to do this.” And that
was it, and they never did.

And after I had been there maybe about a year and a half I started
putting up little things in the lab about vivisection and little quotes
from people. They were very blatant. I mean, as soon as you walked in
the lab you could see them. I had no posters or anything. I think that
would have been a little much. It was my lab.

Rowe: What about your colleagues? Any response from them?

Larson: Yes. There were — in fact, it was interesting because, with the
exception of one, they were all women XE "women and animals" . There was
one man who came forward and actually joined the grassroots effort for
pound seizure. The rest of them were women who would take me aside and
say, “You know, I really believe in what you’re doing, but I don’t want
to lose my job.” I had many women say that to me. They were people who
were like glass washers, people who were technicians. Some of them were
technicians who had been there a long time, and I’m sure they were
making very good money. They were afraid. Some of them were Latvians
that came over here and they got jobs. The Latvian community moved over
probably during World War II XE "World War II" .

Rowe: How did they treat you? They supported what you were doing, but
your aim again at that time was not to close the laboratory down.

Larson: Right.

Rowe: So they felt comfortable.

Larson: But they would not support me publicly. They would support me
privately. The researchers — the man that I worked with, the doctor who
was the director of our group, he was a nice man. In fact, at one point
I remember — I was very close to him. I was invited over to his house on
numerous occasions. I think he struggled somewhat with vivisection.

I remember somebody that I called the Dog XE "dogs" Nazi XE "laboratory
animals" , who is a horrendous person to his human and dog patients.
This particular man, the Dog Nazi — his name was Doug — drew up a grant
that was accepted from the National Science Foundation XE "National
Science Foundation" . The protocol in that particular experiment, which
would have been done in his research lab, was to take dogs, and I can’t
remember the purpose of this. I can’t remember what they were trying to
prove. It escapes me at this point. They were going to take dogs and
they were going to put their feet in liquid nitrogen to burn them. Then
they were going to do something with that, with the dogs’ wounds, after
that. I just don’t remember what it was. I remember sitting in Bob’s
office, our director, when he read over the protocol. He just said, “I
am not doing this. I am not burning dogs.” And that was it. They never
did it because he was the other partner.

Rowe: But he was going along with what was happening at the moment at
that time.

Larson: Oh, yes XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psych1" . He and I got
into it on a number of occasions XE "rodents:mice" \\r "psych1" . Just
let me tell you this one quick story that sort of epitomizes the denial
and the things that went on in the lab. We were taking muscle tissue
from newborn mice. They were in the lab. Obviously to take it you have
to either — you really have to have the animal anesthetized and then at
the end the animal is killed. We were taking the mice and we would put
them in ether until they were very, very, very asleep. Then we would
take muscle tissue from their hind legs — very tiny bits obviously
because they were very tiny. It would take a while because newborns
don’t respond to anesthesia as well as adults do, so it takes a little
while for them, especially with ether.

So at one point Bob got very frustrated with how long this whole thing
was taking. He goes, “You know what? This is taking way too long. Why
don’t we just take some scissors and just cut their heads off?” I looked
at him. I said, “You’re not doing that. We’re not doing that.” And he
did one. I saw him. He stood right there and did it. I walked out. I
walked out of the lab and I went down to the lounge. He finally came
down. I said, “Bob, I’m not doing this. I am not doing this.” So we went
back to doing the anesthetizing.

Rowe: What was his statement to you? What did he say about that to you?

Larson: He didn’t say it was wrong. All he said was, “We’ll go back to
using anesthesia.” He didn’t say it was wrong. He didn’t say, “I’m sorry
this bothers you” or anything else.

Rowe: What do you think was going through his mind?

Larson: I think what was going through his mind was that he needed to
get the experiment done and we needed to put those cells in culture.

Rowe: Did he think you were being emotional, silly, stupid, naïve?

Larson: Oh, I’m sure he thought I was overreacting very much. But then
again, he knew who I was and what I was doing.

Rowe: Okay. So you left the — you were fired.

Larson: No, I wasn’t fired from there. I wasn’t fired from Harvard XE
"Harvard University" . No, no, no. That was from the company for not
approving the media.

Rowe: Did you get involved with NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" at that point? This would have been around this time XE
"managing an organization" \\r "org1" .

Larson: About the same time that CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal
Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" was working on the campaign XE
"animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r "arm2" , the
pound seizure campaign, NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" was about ready to have a general election because their
president had passed away. Robert Ford XE "Ford, Robert" , who was the
vice president, became the interim president until the elections.

So the people at CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and
Exploitation (CEASE)" had this brilliant idea that they would storm the
meeting. They all bought up memberships before the meeting. They would
storm the meeting and they would have write-in candidates to try to get
elected, take over NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" , which of course had much more money than they did, and then
they could run more of a grassroots organization. Plus they were saying
the current NEAVS board are — they’re not animal people. They’re
lawyers, this, that, and the other thing. That’s how I got involved in
NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" because I went
to that meeting.

Rowe: What was your understanding of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" at that time? Did you agree with CEASE
XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" or —

Larson: I very much agreed with CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal
Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" .

Rowe: You felt that NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" was a do-nothing —

Larson: Do-nothing, absolutely do-nothing. Of course, I didn’t really
know anything about NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" . All I knew was what CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal
Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" was telling me. That’s all I knew.
Robert Ford XE "Ford, Robert" didn’t give a you-know-what about animals
and he needed to get out of there and all of his cronies were in there
and they never did anything. So, yes, by God, we’ve got to get them out
of there.

Rowe: So you went to the meeting.

Larson: I went to the meeting. This poor woman who happened to be CEASE
XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" ’s
secretary at the time — she was an elderly woman. She went there in a
fur XE "fur" coat. I thought they were going to stone her. \[Laughter\].

Rowe: You mean the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" secretary was in a fur coat.

Larson: The NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
secretary XE "fur" . Yes. She had been there forever, too. That’s what
she wore. I’m sure it never crossed her mind, I’m sure. It was a very
loud meeting. It took place at the Copley.

Rowe: The Copley Hotel?

Larson: Yes. The police were called in about halfway through and stood
around the room while the rest of the meeting was conducted. Robert Ford
XE "Ford, Robert" did win. He won. After that he appointed two activists
to the board because two were leaving, retiring, or whatever. I can’t
remember. One of them was me and one of them was Amy XE "Robinson, Amy"
Robinson who was sort or directing the whole CEASE XE "Citizens to End
Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" group at that time.

Rowe: What was your feeling about that meeting? Did you think “oh, my
goodness, what type of group have I got myself involved with?” What was
going through your mind during that period of that meeting?

Larson: I was very much in support of what went on there. When people
were screaming — I didn’t scream and I didn’t get out of my seat. And I
have to say I did feel sort of sorry for that older woman because she
didn’t have a clue. Yes, I was very much supporting them in their
screaming and yelling.

Rowe: Had you become a vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" by this point?

Larson: No, I had not.

Rowe: Had CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation
(CEASE)" in some way talked to you about vegetarianism or its
literature?

Larson: No. It didn’t come up. It did not come up at that particular
point.

Rowe: Was CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation
(CEASE)" a mainly young activist organization?

Larson: Yes.

Rowe: And the people at NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" that you saw at that meeting tend to be older?

Larson: Yes, very much, very much so.

Rowe: Did you get a sense of a class difference there? Was it very
Brahmin-esque at NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
?

Larson: Yes. Oh, very much a class difference.

Rowe: And the people at CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and
Exploitation (CEASE)" tended to be what?

Larson: Well, I don’t know if this term really applies — sort of working
class, hard-working. Everybody worked. Everybody had a job outside. One
guy who was very active, his name was Billy, was a Vietnam vet. I think
he was working in a parking lot as a parking lot attendant. Some other
people were doing just jobs that didn’t pay a lot. The one exception was
Amy XE "Robinson, Amy" . Amy was very well-to-do. Her husband was an
architect, a very, very nice house in Newton Falls XE
"Massachusetts:Newton Falls" . She was the one exception in that group.

Rowe: Where did you fit in, did you think, to this class struggle, as it
were, that was taking place?

Larson: Well, you know, my husband and I were both professionals. Excuse
me. I was not married at that time. I was with the person that I had
moved out to New England with, but he was an architect and I was working
at Harvard XE "Harvard University" . So I guess I never really thought
about it because we were all together, but I would have to put myself on
the side where Amy XE "Robinson, Amy" was.

Rowe: So you joined the board. What was your big plan when you joined
the board? What did you —

Larson: To make NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
an activist organization.

Rowe: How did you go about doing that? What were you employed to do?

Larson: We XE "demonstrations and protests" \\r "demo1" were employed at
that particular time to start the pound seizure campaign and to also do
demonstrations. We did some very large demonstrations on the \[Boston\]
Common. That was very, very common, so to speak, back then — lots of
demonstrations, lots of people, lots of marches. That was sort of the
thing to do back then.

Rowe: The thing to do generally you mean in the activist sphere?

Larson: Right. Yes. The thing to do was to do demonstrations. I mean,
you don’t see that very much now or hardly at all. We were doing that.
Then we were supposed to set up the whole pound seizure campaign that
NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" was supposed to
direct.

I have to say in the years that I served on the board that Judge Ford XE
"Ford, Robert" did an incredible turnaround. I think the reason he did
it was because of the pressure from the activists. He didn’t all of a
sudden have a change of heart and say, “Oh, my God, I love animals and
I’m going to take all of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" money and use it to help animals.” No. I think he did it
because of the pressure. But he also had people guiding him. He would
bring in activists and have council with them. “I think you should do
this and that,” and he would listen to them.

Rowe: He was a man with connections.

Larson: Very much so. He was a judge, a Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts"
judge.

Rowe: But he was presumably an anti-vivisectionist, otherwise —

Larson: Presumably he was.

Rowe: Did he ever give any inclination as to his feelings about the
issues that you knew about?

Larson: No. I never heard him — no.

Rowe: Did you become an anti-vivisectionist at this point or had you —

Larson: Oh, absolutely, yes.

Rowe: Did you find him a frustrating person to deal with in that regard?

Larson: I found him frustrating because he was very much a dictator when
it came to the board meetings. Nobody questioned him. Nobody voted
against him. I don’t think Amy XE "Robinson, Amy" and I ever voted
against him either, except when he decided to vote himself a salary and
then we voted against him.

Rowe: So the campaign had — had it already been started or were you the
ones who were brought on the board to start the campaign?

Larson: We started the campaign. It was Amy XE "Robinson, Amy" and I.
The one man from our lab that I told you about that became involved — he
was on there, another man, and the NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" fund-raiser was on that council.

Rowe: Okay. Hold it there.

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

Rowe: So to continue with this XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp2" ,
you planned the campaign XE "animal pounds:pound seizure” \\r "camp2" .
Did you have a model of a campaign that you were following? How did you
decide to do what you did?

Larson: I’m going to answer this, and I then want to go back and say
something else about why I became an anti-vivisectionist at that
particular point.

We got together as a group — there were six of us. We started throwing
out ideas as to what we were going to do. We decided that because we had
already done the grassroots town-to-town and that did not work, because
we did not get all of the towns to pass the ordinance and there were
still quite a few towns that were selling. So that obviously didn’t
work. I think we raised the awareness of the public quite a bit because
there were many, many — and I have this in a file somewhere; God knows
where it is — but many, many newspaper articles that came out in the
\[Boston\] Globe XE "Boston Globe" and all of the big newspapers in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" about these town meetings, because
they’re all covered. Reporters always go to the meetings XE "media" \\r
"pr1" . Some of the meetings got very vocal XE "public
relations/outreach" \\r "pr1" .

Anyway, that didn’t work, so we had to come up with a plan. What we
decided was that we were going to make this a petition campaign. We were
going to make pound seizure a household word in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" so that every single person would know what it is, why
animals were being used, and all of the questions — anything that
anybody had wanted to know, we were going to make up a brochure to
answer any questions. We were going to have the kickoff petition rally
at Faneuil Hall, which we did. We had the media there.

We had — Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" , and I have to really commend him
for this, hired one of the best and most well-known (which I had never
heard of) advertising firms in the country to come up with the logos and
campaign and everything for this. Man, he hit the jackpot on that. We
had the dog behind the bars, the little Benji dog behind the bars.
Everybody knew that picture. We sat down and we talked about what kind
of questions are we going to be asked and what about. We did research on
pound seizure and what they were doing to pound dogs and cats. We had
that all documented. The most commonly asked questions about pound
seizure. And that’s what we decided to do.

We got one of — the senator from Sharon XE "Massachusetts:Sharon" ,
Mass. — I’m trying to remember his name — a very, very powerful senator
in the legislature. He was going to be a sponsor of the campaign. He
actually went to the state house with us when we kicked off the
campaign, the petition. He thought, I think, that it would get him votes
in the next election because this was a — he saw this as a kitty and
doggie issue that people would get behind which, in fact, they did. I
think it was so easy to pass pound seizure because it was about pets. It
was companion animals. It wasn’t the regular laboratory animals. It
wasn’t rats and mice and other animals. It was people’s pets that were
being used.

Rowe: How many signatures did you get?

Larson: We got well over a hundred thousand, which at that particular
point was the most signatures that had ever been collected in the
history of the commonwealth for any campaign.

Rowe: That took you one and a half years.

Larson: To plan and do everything. This was another interesting little
tidbit. We decided that we needed another group to join in with us
because the number of members we had wasn’t big enough. We wanted
thousands and thousands of members. We had — what did we have? Twelve
thousand maybe? Maybe more than that. I don’t know.

Rowe: We being NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .

Larson: NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . So
Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" approached the MSPCA \[Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals\] XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and said,
“Look, we want you guys to go in with us.” We knew they had a huge
mailing list and that all the people that were on their mailing list —
probably most of them were not anti-vivisectionists but they all were
pet people. He said absolutely not, the president of the MSPCA at the
time. Absolutely not. So Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" said, “Well,
that’s really too bad because we’re going to have to put the word out
that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" doesn’t care about dogs and cats and they think it’s
okay for them to be in the lab.” So it was kind of a blackmail type of
thing. Right after that the MSPCA got on board, and I think they were
really glad they did because obviously the pound seizure campaign was
very successful.

So we had their whole mailing list. We rented and established an office
in Waltham XE "Massachusetts:Waltham" . We had a full-time person
working on the database there. We had — in every county in Massachusetts
XE "Massachusetts" we had a coordinator. I was one in Middlesex XE
"Massachusetts:Middlesex" . We had those coordinators who had different
regional people and then people under them who would make phone calls
and make sure people were collecting signatures and all of that. That’s
how we did it.

Rowe: Were you employed to do this by NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ? You had another job.

Larson: Absolutely not.

Rowe: What were you doing? How did you make money? You were working in
the lab XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper2" ?

Larson: I was still working the lab. Oh, yes. \[Laughter\].

Rowe: And how did you feel about that?

Larson: And we were using pound dogs in the lab XE "dogs" \\r "dog2" !
Unfortunately XE "laboratory animals" \\r "dog2" , I XE "animal
pounds:pound seizure” \\r "dog2" became more and more passionate about
this issue because of the dogs that — we were bringing the dogs from
Harvard XE "Harvard University" over to the Joslin XE "Joslin Diabetes
Center" , so they were right there. Just so many things were happening.
For example, the dogs that were coming in, and one of the reasons that
it’s not a good idea to use pound dogs from a scientific standpoint XE
"veterinary medicine" is that you don’t know their background. You don’t
know their genetics. You don’t know what they’ve been exposed to. And we
had no veterinarian on our team. You have surgeons, you have doctors
that work on humans. They don’t know anything about canine physiology.
We had one dog in there, absolutely lovely Dalmatian. I told them — I
said, “When you’re done with her, I want her.” She died of an overdose
of heparin. That was simply a mistake on their part. That was an MD. If
that was a veterinarian doing that, that would not have happened.

Rowe: You had no ability to stop that.

Larson: No, I did not. I had no say over what they were doing to the
dogs.

Rowe: Did you feel that you were serving a useful purpose by remaining
in this laboratory?

Larson: Absolutely not.

Rowe: You really wanted to get out of there.

Larson: I wanted to get out of there. The only reason I stayed was to
collect information. The last two years that I was in that lab, it was
torture XE "psychological aspects" .

Rowe: So you were performing a useful function by gathering information.

Larson: Right.

Rowe: But the last two years were torture.

Larson: Absolute torture. I can’t remember the number of days that I
would stop working on what I was working on, go into the ladies
restroom, and cry. It was just absolute torture to be there. I don’t
think about it very often because I get very emotional about that time.
It was horrendous.

Rowe: So the campaign was successful.

Larson: Yes, it was.

Rowe: We’d love you to go further in detail of it. Maybe we’ll be able
to do that at a later point. How did you then continue to be involved
with NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" after the
campaign was over?

Larson: After the campaign was over, at that point I decided that I
wanted to — really wanted to leave. I wanted to work for NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" as an employee. What I did was
I drew up a proposal for Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" on humane
education XE "education" . I said to him, “What is really important is
for us to influence the youth on these issues, maybe not quite as
graphic, but to get them to understand that animals have feelings and to
be compassionate and to be kind and this kind of thing.” I drew up that
proposal to start a humane education program for NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . He accepted it and I was hired at a
very low salary, much less than I was making in the lab, to start the
education program. That’s when I then resigned from the board because of
the conflict of interest. I started working full-time. There was only
one person in the education department, and that was me. Eventually
there were seventeen or eighteen. So that’s what I did XE "education" .

But before I left I went — let’s see. They still had not changed any of
the locks there, plus I had my ID where I could get in anywhere in any
of the labs or anywhere. I went and I had a friend help me to keep a
lookout and everything and I took pictures of everything. I took
pictures of the just atrocious conditions in the lab, how filthy it was,
the signs that researchers would put up. I took pictures of the
greyhounds over at the med school that they were using for heart
research. Just everything — pictures of inside of the refrigerator with
all the dead animals in there. Everything that I could photograph, I
photographed, and then I left.

But before I left I did one other thing XE "law and legislation" . I
said, “You know what?” I went to the director of research, the financial
director, and I said, “Do you know what, Connie? You have many
violations of the animal welfare act. Did you know that?” She said yes.
I said, “Are you going to do anything about it?” She said no. I said,
“Why not?” She said, “Because it’s way too expensive. We would have to
completely revamp all of these labs and it would be way too expensive.”
I said, “Oh. Okay.”

So when I left, the next day I called the USDA XE "U.S. Department of
Agriculture" \[U.S. Department of Agriculture\] office, a woman
veterinarian by the name of Dr. Hinton XE "Hinton, \_\_\_\_\_\_" . I
told her what was going on over there. I said, “Do you know what? I
don’t care if you use my name. I’m just reporting what is going on.” I
said, “You need to make a surprise inspection. You need to just show
up.” She did, and she closed the animal lab because of the violations XE
"law and legislation" .

Rowe: Did you ever see or speak to Connie again?

Larson: No, I didn’t. I spoke with Bob, the MD I worked with, once. Oh,
one of the technicians whom I kept in touch with, I have kept in touch
with her but that is it. Nobody else.

Rowe: So your education program — what was your main purpose XE
"education" \\r "educ1" ? How did you feel that the education would best
be utilized XE "children and animals" \\r "educ1" ? What was the main
way that you wanted to educate people?

Larson: First of all, the program was geared towards schools. It was K
\[kindergarten\] through college. We had one program that I did most
often that was for 3rd through 7th grade. That was more of a pet type of
thing. It was to try to raise their awareness about feelings and about
compassion and about how animals — we would put things up on the board
comparing humans and non-humans just to get them to understand. Then I
had some real tear-jerkers, movies that I had purchased. I became very
involved in buying all kinds of movies to show because kids, they like
that. Those movies would really get their attention. So we would talk
about issues like spaying and neutering, and not necessarily vivisection
XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper3" . I never talked
about vivisection to kids that were 3rd grade and under because, first
of all, they wouldn’t have understood, and second of all — probably
would today. They probably would today but not back then, and I didn’t
think it was appropriate.

Rowe: It would be too distressing. Was there resistance to this kind of
“propaganda” or was it not seen as propaganda?

Larson: Yes.

Rowe: Who was resisting and what did they say?

Larson: Massachusetts Teachers Association XE "Massachusetts Teachers
Association" . When we first started this program we advertised in the
MTA’s magazine that went out monthly. We had a very nice ad that was
very benign, had a little bunny on it and a little child. We got a big
response from people. But once the MTA found out who was paying for the
ad, they would not let us advertise. We very seriously considered suing
them, but we decided not to.

Rowe: Because it would be a Pyrrhic victory.

Larson: Exactly. Exactly right.

Rowe: But you must have — you probably must have realized that this
would be likely to occur that you would get resistance, especially when
you were being backed by NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" .

Larson: Right.

Rowe: How did you feel that you would get around that, even if it was
anodyne as a bunny and a baby or a bunny and a young person?

Larson: There were teachers out there that spread the idea of the
program — word of mouth, so to speak. So I did get more teachers in that
way. We also started advertising in the New Hampshire XE "New Hampshire"
teachers, Connecticut XE "Connecticut" , Rhode Island XE "Rhode Island"
, so that we sort of branched out. We had many teachers respond. I have
to say what we eventually did was we developed a name for the education
program. The name started out to be — first it was the STAR Program and
then it said New England Anti-Viv. STAR stood for Students Think about
Animal Rights XE "Students Think about Animal Rights (STAR)" . Well, you
know. \[Laughter\]. Talking about trying to get in somewhere and just —
it was ridiculous.

Rowe: Was it naïveté that made you do that?

Larson: Probably, yes. We changed the name eventually to the LivingEarth
Learning Project XE "LivingEarth Learning Project" . We threw in a
couple of environmental programs which, of course, were very heavily
animal, endangered species XE "endangered species" . Why are they
endangered and they’re in the lab and they’re this and that. We threw a
lot of stuff into that. We eventually changed the name. NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" was nowhere to be seen on the
advertisements. That’s what we eventually did. That worked well.

Rowe: So this was going on throughout the entire 1980s?

Larson: Correct. And into the 90s.

Rowe: Talk a bit about what was happening to NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" in the mid-1980s. Robert Ford XE
"Ford, Robert" left the organization, I believe, in the 1980s.

Larson: Well.

Rowe: What was the story behind that? What was the issue that was the
problem?

Larson: After the pound seizure campaign XE "public relations/outreach"
\\r "pr2" , I don’t really think anybody was complaining about Judge
Ford XE "Ford, Robert" during that time XE "media" \\r "pr2" . He ended
up — right on the heels of that campaign, he ended up taking that same
firm that did the publicity and all the ads for pound seizure to really
break ground. No animal group had ever done this. He approached two
very, very large publications, Time XE "Time \[magazine\]" and Newsweek
XE "Newsweek" magazines. He said, “I want to put a full-page ad in about
animal testing.” He did. Of course, the very famous bunny with the
glasses on, the blind glasses. We paid through the nose for those ads. A
full-page ad in Time or Newsweek is horrendously expensive. But he took
NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’ money — he was
spending the money on the animals. This is before the downturn. We got
thousands of new members from that campaign making people aware. We sent
out information.

After those ads — he did that twice, two different ads — things sort of
came to a standstill. At that particular time PETA XE "People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" \[People for the Ethical Treatment
of Animals\] decided that they would do the same thing as CEASE XE
"Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" did in
trying to takeover NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" because of the money issue XE "funding/finance" . At that
particular point, NEAVS had received some very large bequests. They had
millions of dollars at that point.

Rowe: You were still involved with your campaign. Was that the central
program of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" , the
education campaign? What were the other campaigns that were going along
at the same time in the mid-80s? There was resounding success you had
with the pound seizure bill that stimulated Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert"
to employ you to do the education program. What were the other programs
that were being planned?

Larson: We had two major focuses at that time XE "animal experimentation
and testing" \\r "exper4" . One was the education program. The other one
was the animal testing. That was our focus at that point. We had just
barely started the Gillette XE "Gillette" campaign, letting people know
what went on there.

Rowe: The campaign to stop Gillette XE "Gillette" experimenting on
animals.

Larson: That’s correct. Revlon XE "Revlon" at that point had not stopped
testing. Animal testing was the focus at that time. Henry XE "Spira,
Henry" Spira started his coalition back then.

Rowe: Were you involved with working with him in some form? Was he in
coalition with you or was he very much working on his own?

Larson: Henry? Henry was on our board for a while, and I was on the
board. For about six months he was on the board and then I left. Henry
XE "Spira, Henry" was — what a character. An absolutely phenomenal man.
I’ve never met anyone like him, absolutely phenomenal.

Rowe: In what way?

Larson: He was very much himself. He never put on airs. When he came to
a high tea at the Copley, he wore pants that he probably painted his
house in, just a regular shirt with his sleeves rolled up, no tie, not
shaven. He would show up and he would get in there to work. He drank his
tea with the teaspoon in it the whole time. He was a character. But he
was extremely effective. He didn’t back down to people either. I mean,
he didn’t have any fear of approaching people with power. What is there
to fear really? That was Henry XE "Spira, Henry" . He was great.

Rowe: So you were working on — there were ads, there were campaigns.
Were there particular campaigns against any particular places that NEAVS
XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" was working on?

Larson: There was a big push against Revlon XE "Revlon" , but that was
mostly by the Draize Coalition, Henry XE "Spira, Henry" ’s coalition. We
focused on Gillette XE "Gillette" because there’s a big Gillette
corporation in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . We had many
demonstrations XE "demonstrations and protests" outside. We did things
like had volunteers put on rabbit costumes and we would go out and stand
out and try to get people to understand what was going on, passing out
literature.

Rowe: Were you involved with that as well?

Larson: No.

Rowe: You weren’t. You stuck specifically with education.

Larson: Right.

Rowe: During the turbulent times in the mid-80s, the latter middle 80s,
were you very much out of the politics involved with it XE "managing an
organization" \\r "org2" . You were in the thick of it.

Larson: Oh, yes. I was right in there.

Rowe: What was your feeling about what happened?

Larson: I was very much against PETA XE "People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PETA)" taking over. I know the activists at the
time were very much — in fact, this is really how they got in because
they got a hold of the people in CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal
Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" . CEASE supported them a hundred
percent.

Rowe: The CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation
(CEASE)" people still felt that the organization was not being
effective.

Larson: Was not being effective and did not have — they felt that the
entire board should be activists. Now, when Henry XE "Spira, Henry" was
on the board, there was Amy XE "Robinson, Amy" and I, then I left. Then
there was Amy and Henry. That was it. The rest of the board was still
the old guard, the lawyers and the Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" people.

Rowe: Judge Ford had made a kind of sea change. He had become
conscientized, as they say, in Marxist circles. The other members of the
board had not.

Larson: No.

Rowe: What were they doing? You were on the board.

Larson: They weren’t doing anything, absolutely nothing. They were never
at any of the rallies or demonstrations. They never wrote anything as
far as helping out. They just came to the meetings and sort of doodled
on their pads, and that was it.

Rowe: What did you feel about them? Did you feel they should go as well?

Larson: Absolutely.

Rowe: Did you feel of two minds about it because you now were an
employee and supportive to a certain extent of Robert Ford XE "Ford,
Robert" . Am I right in thinking that?

Larson: Yes.

Rowe: And yet you were seeing this takeover taking place and people
demanding an activist board. Did you feel that some members of the board
shouldn’t be activists, or did you feel that all the board should be
activists?

Larson: I felt that all of the board should be activists. Absolutely.
Just because you’re an activist doesn’t mean that you’re a member of
CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" .
An activist can be anybody.

Rowe: But you were critical of PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment
of Animals (PETA)" and CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and
Exploitation (CEASE)" taking over.

Larson: Very much.

Rowe: Why?

Larson: First of all, I felt insulted that they thought that they could
do a better job running the organization than the people that were
there. Who are they to tell us after we have done \[all this work\] that
they need to come in and take over the organization? I thought that was
very arrogant, and I was very insulted about the whole thing.

Rowe: You felt they wanted to take over the whole organization not just
the board.

Larson: Oh, absolutely. Well, that was the plan. And because they have
to take over everything to have access to the money. There were rumors
going around that they were going to take over and they were going to
spend all the money, which is not very far from what happened. Plus we,
the people that were on the staff, felt that we were going to be fired
because we supported Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" . I got a personal
phone call at my house one night from Ingrid Newkirk XE "Newkirk,
Ingrid" assuring me that my job would still be there and how important
they felt the education program was. I’m like, “Yes. Sure.”
\[Laughter\].

Rowe: You didn’t believe them.

Larson: No, I didn’t.

Rowe: You didn’t believe them why?

Larson: Because I didn’t trust them.

Rowe: Because of their prior activities?

Larson: No, no, no. I had only met Ingrid once, and that was — I think
it was back in 1980. It was when PETA XE "People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PETA)" was just very, very fledgling. She came up
and she was going around at one of our demonstrations collecting
signatures by herself for some bill that had to do with livestock.
That’s the only time I had met her. Part of the problem was that there
were so many rumors flying around. This is going to happen. It’s like
the millennium and January 1st, there’s not going to be this and this.
It was the same thing with the PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment
of Animals (PETA)" takeover.

Rowe: But Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" was in the end forced to step
down.

Larson: Yes.

Rowe: And a new president, Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory, was
instituted.

Larson: Correct.

Rowe: How did you feel about that transition?

Larson: Well, I was thrilled that Cleveland was on board. He was sort
the mild-mannered — comparatively — and more thoughtful, I think, member
of the board, president. I’ve always had the utmost respect for
Cleveland.

Rowe: Eventually — which I can talk with Theo XE "Capaldo, Theodora"
about. Theo is instituted as the president.

Larson: Right. Yes.

Rowe: What happened to you in terms of your activity then with NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ? You’re still going on
the education program?

Larson: Yes.

Rowe: But you also began lobbying XE "campaigning/lobbying" as well. Or
had you been lobbying all the time with local legislators XE "law and
legislation" ?

Larson: During the summer I did some lobbying.

Rowe: Summer of 1980 —

Larson: Let me think. Eighty-seven and ’88. Because it was — first of
all, school was not in session. We had introduced the first dissection
XE "animal experimentation and testing:dissection" bill that would —
student choice dissection bill which was the bill I was working on,
talking to aides, trying to educate them on the bill because the
legislature wasn’t even in session in the summertime. So it was
developing things to hand out to these people to try to get them on
board with the whole dissection campaign. That’s what I did.

Rowe: You were involved with the director of Ethical Science and
Education Coalition XE "Ethical Science and Education Coalition (ESEC)"
\[ESEC\] XE "education" \\r "educ2" .

Larson: That came a little later.

Rowe: That was in 1990. Why did you feel that was different from your
previous education campaign? Why was there a need for another type of
education campaign? This was specifically involved with science.

Larson: ESEC started out as grassroots, the same way pound seizure did.
In fact, we used the same model. We went from town to town. In 1989 I
quit NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" because I
had moved to Connecticut XE "Connecticut" . The new board had decided
that — they insisted that I come into the office everyday. There’s no
way I’m going to commute from Connecticut into Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" every day, so I quit. The next day I was called
to see if I wanted to become like a field rep. Do you want to just do
programs from your house and do the programs for the requests that come
in? I said, “Yes, I’ll do that.” They hired another director of
education.

So during the time that I was doing this field stuff for NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" , I also worked for Friends of
Animals XE "Friends of Animals" . I was supplementing my income. I was
working on the dissection campaign. When that happened I met a woman by
the name of Pat XE "Butterfield, Pat" Butterfield. She and I formed the
Ethical Science and Education Coalition XE "Ethical Science and
Education Coalition (ESEC)" , which had nothing to do with NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . She and I were working on
that in Connecticut XE "Connecticut" , just the two of us. We decided
that we would do it the grassroots method. We would get people together,
we would go town to town, and this time we would present to the boards
of education and try to get them to pass a resolution that would allow
students to choose non-animal methods to learn anatomy.

Rowe: You were basically trying to use the same strategy that you had
used with pound seizure.

Larson: Exactly.

Rowe: How successful was or has that been?

Larson: Extremely. We ended up — I think the first year that we started
—

Rowe: Just the two of \[you\].

Larson: Yes. Pat XE "Butterfield, Pat" and I. There were a total — and
we have a scrapbook — of 310 newspaper articles about ESEC and about the
to-dos and the board and this student went and presented and all of
that. So we got a lot of publicity. We were interviewed quite a bit on
why this is a good idea and so on.

After that first year, Frank, who was the president of NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" — and I had not been into the
office at all during that time — called me and said, “You know, I’d
really like to meet with Pat XE "Butterfield, Pat" and you in
Connecticut XE "Connecticut" to talk about ESEC.” I said fine. So we met
him and Arnold Behrer XE "Behrer, Arnold" \[phonetic\], who was from
HSUS \[Humane Society of the United States\] XE "Humane Society of the
United States (HSUS)" . Somebody else was in that group — Pat XE
"Butterfield, Pat" and I and there was another person. I don’t remember
who it was. I think it might have been Laura Simon XE "Simon, Laura" ,
who was on the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
board at that time.

We had a meeting, and Frank’s proposal was he wanted NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" to adopt ESEC to be a NEAVS
program, that Pat XE "Butterfield, Pat" and I would still work out of
our homes and direct the whole thing, but that it would be a NEAVS
program and it would be funded by NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" . Up until that time, Pat XE "Butterfield, Pat" and I
really hadn’t developed — decided on a final name for what we were
doing. This is the Ethical Science and Education Coalition XE "Ethical
Science and Education Coalition (ESEC)" . It was actually Pat XE
"Butterfield, Pat" ’s husband that came up with that name. Frank said,
“We’re going to have to put the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" name in here.” I said, “Absolutely not. The last thing
we need is the New England Anti-Vivisection Society and teachers saying,
‘Yes, the real goal is to eliminate all animals and all animal research
and they’re abolitionists.’” So I was very, very adamant about keeping
NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" name completely
out of that campaign, and it was.

Rowe: It’s unfortunate. It would be good to go on longer, but we don’t
have time. That’s an interesting reflection because the organization
that seeks to educate has to reach the very people who will immediately
turn themselves off.

Larson: Exactly.

Rowe: Over the last twenty years XE "ethics and morality" \\r "ethic1" ,
do you feel that the aim of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" has been correct in its approach XE "managing an
organization" \\r "ethic1" ? Or do you feel that its fundamental aim
should be to raise public consciousness to put pressure on the
scientific community to just stop doing what it’s doing irrespective of
what the scientific community may say the benefits are to human beings
XE "science/scientific community" \\r "ethic1" ? Or should it be to
convince enough scientist and enough organizations that this is
scientifically inefficacious and morally wrong and therefore should
stop?

Larson: Well, neither. \[Laughter\].

Rowe: That’s good to know there’s another way.

Larson: I think we should — and we were working towards this. We’ve sort
of fallen off the wagon here. But that NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" — and I’ve lobbied for this for years
and years that NEAVS should become a scientific organization, that we
should meet the scientists on their level, and go to the scientific
meetings as — my proposal was that ESEC XE "Ethical Science and
Education Coalition (ESEC)" would be the scientific arm of NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" , and then we’d have NEAVS,
the mother organization.

The scientific arm of NEAVS would be run by scientists. They would
approach other scientists and do exactly what we’re doing at Tufts XE
"Tufts University" \[University\]. I think Theo XE "Capaldo, Theodora"
is going to talk a little bit about that. But proposing to them, “You’re
planning on hiring a philosophy professor to talk about ethics. What if
we pay his salary” — it turned out to be a he — “pay his salary and let
us help you make the decision?” Well, they bought it. They did, and we
got exactly the person we wanted in there so that they now have an
ethics professor, somebody that we would highly recommend, to try to
raise their awareness of the issues in veterinary medicine. We also
suggested and we proposed to them that in the fourth year —

Rowe: We being?

Larson: NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . That
we fund a surgical lab where students in their fourth year would get
hands-on experience spaying and neutering XE "spaying and neutering"
dogs and cats that would be provided by the humane societies so that
they would get free spays and neuters, which would help adopt out the
animals, that people would get hands-on experience in surgery. So
everybody would benefit. We said, “We will fund this lab if you will do
this so that animals will not be killed.” They said okay XE "veterinary
medicine" \\r "vet3" .

Rowe: So the resistance has been much lower if you provide them with a
programmatic way of understanding the material. They need to have the
work done for them rather than coming in and battering on the door and
saying, “Stop, stop, stop.”

Larson: Exactly. Because you’re being professional about it. For
example, let me just give you one other example of that. That year that
I was not working for NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" , I was just doing field work, I went back and I got my
teaching degree. They have an accelerated program for people with
master’s degree in Connecticut XE "Connecticut" where you can get a
teaching degree in your field. The reason I did that was so that I could
approach science teachers as a science teacher. Yes, I’m certified to
teach biology, I have degrees in this, this, and this. So that when I
spoke on the issue I could say, “Yes, I’m a science teacher” so that I
wouldn’t be just a person — do you know what I mean? — an activist.

Rowe: Therefore, consequently, let’s think about the history of the New
England Anti-Vivisection Society, which has been an abolitionist moral
crusade.

Larson: Right. And I’m not saying to get rid of that. Remember, I said
there were three blocs. We still have NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" , the mother organization, which would
be the moral ethical part.

Rowe: So you’re looking for a sort of broader coalition, a sort of
triumvirate — tripartite, I should say — aspect. Do you think the
vivisection community — anti-vivisection community as a whole is by
default moving in that direction because of a wider awareness of needing
to meet the scientists and the teachers on their own grounds?

Larson: I think the people involved in the dissection XE "animal
experimentation and testing:dissection" issue have seen that that
approach has worked very well. When we \[ESEC\] approached dissection
from a pedagogical standpoint, there was no argument. There was nothing
that they could say that could refute what we were saying because it was
airtight case. This and this and this — the teachers couldn’t say
anything. I think if we’re approaching this issue from a scientific
standpoint — and that’s not to say that the ethics isn’t just as
important — but you have people in the organization concentrating on,
“Ethics is my field here and I’m going to concentrate on that” rather
than trying to learn all the science, all the ethics, all this and that.
We have people that are concentrating in that field. My background is
science. I love science. That’s what I do. So I’ve been able to use some
of my background to assist me in the jobs that I’ve done.

Rowe: Okay.

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

INDEX \\h " " \\c "1" \\e " "

Amory, Cleveland 23

animal experimentation and testing 6–8, 10–12, 17–18, 19, 21

dissection 24, 27

Animal Liberation Front (ALF) 10

animal pounds

pound seizure 7, 9–10, 15–17

animal rights movement/animal protection community 8–9, 12–14

Arizona

Tucson 5, 6

Arizona State University 5

Arkansas 1, 2, 4, 5

Bechtel Corporation 5

Behrer, Arnold 25

Boston Globe 15

business corporations 5

Butterfield, Pat 25

California 2

Los Angeles 1–3

campaigning/lobbying 7, 9–10, 15–17, 24

Capaldo, Theodora 24, 26

chickens 4

children and animals 19–20

Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE) 8, 12, 13, 20,
22, 23

Connecticut 20, 24–26

cows 3, 4

demonstrations and protests 14, 21

dogs 7–8, 11, 17

education 18, 19–20, 24–27

endangered species 20

Ethical Science and Education Coalition (ESEC) 24–26

ethics and morality 26–27

factory farms 4

Ford, Robert 12–14, 16, 18, 20–23

Friends of Animals 25

funding/finance 20

fur 12, 13

Gillette 21

Harvard University 5–7, 9, 10, 12, 14, 17

Hinton, \_\_\_\_\_\_ 18

horses 4

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 25

Joslin Diabetes Center 6, 17

laboratory animals 7–8, 11, 17

law and legislation 9–10, 18, 24

LivingEarth Learning Project 20

managing an organization 12–15, 22–24, 26–27

Massachusetts 6, 7, 9, 14–17

Boston 8, 9, 21, 24

Middlesex 17

Newton Falls 14

Sharon 16

Waltham 17

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)
16

Massachusetts Teachers Association 19

media 15–16, 20

medicine/medical community 6, 10–12

National Science Foundation 11

New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS) 3, 7, 12–21, 24–27

New Hampshire 7, 20

Newkirk, Ingrid 23

Newsweek 20

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 5

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 20, 22, 23

psychological aspects 9, 11–12, 17

public relations/outreach 15–16, 20

Revlon 21

Rhode Island 20

Robinson, Amy 13–15, 22

rodents

mice 11–12

science/scientific community 1, 5, 26–27

Simon, Laura 25

spaying and neutering 2, 26

Spira, Henry 21, 22

Students Think about Animal Rights (STAR) 20

Swit, Loretta 8

Time \[magazine\] 20

Tufts University 26

Tyson Foods Inc. 4

U.S. Department of Agriculture 18

veal calves 8

vegetarianism 4, 13

veterinary medicine 1, 3–4, 17, 26

women and animals 10

World War II 10
