---
---

This edited transcript is the product of a tape-recorded interview
conducted by Martin Rowe with Carter Luke in Boston, Massachusetts on
April 28, 2000, for Recording Animal Advocacy.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 – April 28, 2000

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

1

Childhood experiences with cats and dogs and wildlife – Taking wildlife
science courses at University of Wisconsin – Devastated at death of a
chipmunk for a trapping assign-ment – Inspired by Aldo Leopold – Writing
to Harry Harlow (known for his psycho-logical research with monkeys) in
late 1970s – Visiting Harlow’s successor Steve Suomi; impressed with
Suomi’s thoughtfulness and openness – Writing to a leader in the animal
rights community about Suomi and receiving a dismissive reply –
Importance of treating people with respect – Joining MSPCA in 1985 as
Director of Shelters – Narrow focus of MSPCA shelters and lack of
interaction with local communities – MSPCA’s huge financial resources;
criticisms from grassroots animal activists in early-mid 1980s; the
organization’s efforts to start recruiting new people.

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

MSPCA becoming much more open with financial and other information –
Development of priorities in MSPCA – Qualities and abilities of MSPCA
shelter workers; appropriate-ness of their engagement in civil
disobedience – MSPCA’s law enforcement powers – Animal shelter / farm at
Methuen: recruiting good staff; reaching out to the local community –
Research on connection between cruelty to animals and to people; acts of
cruelty in children – Very proud of 1993 Year of the Cat national
campaign: involvement of many different types of animal organizations;
activities done with minimal overhead.

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

Views on coalitions and campaigning: Henry Spira a great strategic
thinker; reasons why preferences given to coalitions such as the one
related to anti-trapping in Massachusetts in late 1990s; Wayne Pacelle’s
role in the campaign; reasons for MSPCA’s decision to not participate
actively in greyhound racing ban campaign in 1999 – Little interaction
between the veterinary and humane communities, including within the
MSPCA; differences in their food choices – Recent positive changes in
members of veterinary profession – Importance of taking care of one’s
well-being and letting the community share animal-related concerns.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

April 28, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts – Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals

Session of 1-3/4 hour

Interviewer:

Martin Rowe (author, editor, publisher)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was reviewed by Luke; no corrections were made. Lee
prepared the introductory material and index.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Born in 1948, Carter Luke took a keen interest in wild and companion
animals when he was growing up. He received his B.A. in Mathematics and
Wildlife Ecology from the University of Wisconsin, and also did graduate
work in Elementary Education. He was an elementary school teacher in
Wisconsin from 1973 to 1976, and worked on and off as carpenter, painter
and drywaller from the mid-1960s to mid-1970s.

In 1977 he left teaching for the post of shelter manager and humane
officer at Coulee Region Humane Society in Wisconsin. He remained there
for six years, then served as the Executive Director of Dane County
Humane Society in Madison, Wisconsin. Excited by the opportunity to work
for the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA) when the organization took encouraging steps to recruit new
staff and share its information more widely, Luke joined the MSPCA in
1985 as Director of Shelters. He became their Vice President of Humane
Services in 1988, a position he still holds. He counts among his major
accomplishments at the MSPCA the national Year of the Cat Campaign in
1993, and the positive influence he has had on shelter workers and the
shelters’ outreach activities. He is also interested in the connection
between cruelty to animals and to people.

Carter Luke

April 28, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts

Martin Rowe, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Rowe: I’d like to ask you a bit about your early life, how you got
involved with animals. I noticed that you have qualifications in
wildlife ecology. How did you reach that stage where you wanted to start
taking official qualifications? Was it a degree?

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: A degree in wildlife ecology.

Luke: Right. That was a way back but not early life. When you say early
life do you mean—

Rowe: I mean your growing up years. You grew up in New York XE "New
York:New York City" City.

Luke: I was born in New York City, but I grew up in suburban—primarily
suburban Chicago XE "Illinois:Chicago" but also a little bit of suburban
New York XE "New York:New York City" . My father worked in the magazine
business for Life XE "Life (magazine)" magazine, Sports Illustrated XE
"Sports Illustrated" , so we moved back and forth between New York XE
"New York:New York City" and Chicago XE "Illinois:Chicago" metropolitan
area. I was one of those kids growing up that spent a lot of time down
by the creek with his knees in the mud with tadpoles and wanted to
always have fish and chameleons and frogs and assembled and collected
things like that.

Rowe: Was there any family history of animal care?

Luke: No. In fact, I wouldn’t say necessarily that there was a history
of family care. Our family got our first pet, at least while I was
alive—my mother was always a dog person. In a lot of pictures of her as
a kid my mother is almost always with a dog. Our family—I was the oldest
in the family, and we first got a puppy when I was about five or six
years old.

Rowe: Was that your idea?

Luke: I don’t remember, but it certainly was viewed as—I certainly
viewed it as my dog.

Rowe: You kept care—you met—

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: You took care of the dog.

Luke: Yes. The dog was my companion, my friend. I remember everything
about that dog. It was the first time that I certainly had the joy of
the smell of puppy breath and certainly remember the—in fact, I probably
recall the handling of the fur and the smell of the animal maybe as much
as anything. I also remember a lot of destruction in terms of the dog
chewing on things. The puppy was definitely mine. What I remember is the
dog chewing on things—a lot of destroyed shoes and books and things like
that.

Rowe: So it was a full sensual experience with your knees in the mud,
you liked the hands-on feel, so it was an obvious emerging interest in
biology and wildlife throughout your youth.

Luke: Right. I was always one of those who collected everything from—for
a while we lived by woods, and I do remember also bringing home bones.
In fact, a couple of years ago \[I\] found an old collection of bones
that I had picked up when I was six or seven or eight years old in the
wild. And just finding—I never knew what they were. They were just like
bones. I remember doing—I found this scrapbook that was called “Bones
and Stuff” or something like that, just bones that I had found that I
had put into notebooks. That was always an interest.

There were problems with the behavior of this dog I know, but all I
remember is things being chewed up. But then Lucky XE "Lucky \[dog\]" ,
which was the dog’s name, ended up on a farm. Then my family began what
was a series of forever after cat members of the family. So after I was
maybe eight or nine years old there were always cats in the household.
So that continued and my interest with animals.

I was the oldest of four kids and I was always the primary animal person
in the house. It wasn’t that anybody didn’t. My mother and I were the
two animal people in the house. That continued to the point where when I
was in college and moved away from home for the first time, I was one of
those people who was getting a dog and sneaking it into the dormitory.
The dog was always—dogs or cats have always been a part of my life. So I
was one of those people XE "dogs" \\r "dog1" .

As an undergraduate I had always been a fairly successful student,
particularly in quantitative kinds of things. By the time I had finished
my sophomore year I had completed enough mathematics credits to be a
major. I had an experience—a physical accident actually—that happened to
me that didn’t allow me to work. I worked a lot when I was going to
school.

Rowe: Had you worked with animals at all?

Luke: No. Washing dishes, doing that kind of stuff. I wasn’t able to
work and it kind of did a nice job of focusing what I really want to do
with my life. I didn’t really want to be a mathematician. It was always
something I was good at but I showed no passion for. So I began my
junior year by taking every possible biology, zoology, wildlife class
that I could get my hands on.

Rowe: Were there any inspirations to you, any mentors, any people you
looked up to as people who you wanted to be?

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: Such as?

Luke: Aldo Leopold XE "Leopold, Aldo" . I was in Wisconsin at the time.
I went to school at the University of Wisconsin XE "University of
Wisconsin" and, in fact, moved to Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin" in 1967 and
stayed there for a number of years. Aldo Leopold XE "Leopold, Aldo" , a
naturalist, was a major presence and person in Wisconsin. He had taught
at the university. The wildlife management school engaged him and a
number of his protégés a lot. So I spent a lot of time with a lot of
those people while I was going to school.

I certainly remember a fundamental experience. As I was moving my way
through the wildlife ecology and wildlife management programs, I always
found myself dealing with a lot of people in flannel shirts whose
primary interest in the month of November was hunting. I did not grow up
in a family that hunted. That’s not a part of me, never has been, and
never will be. There was always a very negative view in my family and in
myself about guns, violence, and hunting. Although I did grow up in a
meat-eating household.

At any rate, what I recall was that all of a sudden in this study of
wildlife science that there were mostly people who were hunters in it.
That was a new exposure for me. I wasn’t aware of that.

Rowe: What was the aim of the course of wildlife science? Was it very
much geared towards hunters?

Luke: Well, yes, actually. As I moved through it and became in more
upper level classes, when the concept of—I remember a class, for
example, in population dynamics. It was my first introduction to issues
like harvest, maintaining a harvest and suitable populations for
harvest, which I always found to be a very funny word, “harvest.” I
found myself exposed to a lot of those folks and learned essentially
that wildlife “management” meant the sustainable harvest.

Rowe: I should say management is being given in invisible inverted
quotes.

Luke: Yes, please. Same with the word “conservation.” I think perhaps a
significant event that I will never forget was I took a class in
mammalogy. We were given the text book, which was called Game Mammals XE
"Game Mammals (textbook)" . So the course title was “Mammalogy” \[but\]
the primary textbook was Game Mammals. Part of the class work—we went
through the various families of mammals that were indigenous to
Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin" . Part of the introduction, the opening part of
the class, was, we’re going to be doing a lot of hands-on handling of
wildlife and of dead wild animals that live around here. Student
assignments are to capture wildlife and bring them to class. We’re going
to provide you with traps, and here’s how we want you to do this. We
want you to keep records and we want you out—I don’t remember the exact
number. But we were each given five traps and told to trap animals, five
traps a night for thirty nights or something. I don’t remember exactly,
but there were a certain number of “trap nights” that we were supposed
to set these traps and bring in the animals that we had killed XE
"wildlife management" \\r "wildmanage1" .

Rowe: Any type of animal?

Luke: Any type of mammal. There were no licensing issues going on. This
is 1968. Also the class was encouraged to pick up any road-kill and
bring them in, except for skunks. I had never done anything like this
before. The leg-hold traps were not things I was familiar with or
comfortable with, and I didn’t take those. They were also in this—you
were supposed to take five traps. They were mousetraps I took, and I did
participate in this.

Rowe: How did you feel?

Luke: Well, I’ll get to it. I took four mousetraps and one larger rat
trap. I took them, and I remember the first night I went out. This was a
very vivid experience for me. I took them, and there was an area of
woods that I used to spend a lot of time in. It was along a lake in an
area that I was comfortable with, and water and woods are something that
I feel are a part of my soul. I actually was, I think—I was going about
this class work in a non-considering-a-lot-of-ethical-issues here. It
was happening during an explosion of ethical things in my head, and it
freaked me out a little bit. But I went ahead and did it XE "chipmunks"
\\r "chip1" .

I set the traps one night. In one of the mousetraps, actually, I caught
a chipmunk. I didn’t catch anything in the others. I was devastated when
I saw that chipmunk in a trap.

Rowe: The chipmunk was dead?

Luke: Yes. I have a strong—it happens to be an animal that I feel very
close to. That I had done this as part of an educational experience, I
had killed this animal, was just mind-blowing to me. I remember sitting
on this rock, and I remember sitting there thinking, “How could I have
done this? How could I have allowed myself to do this?” and that I was
no longer going to be able to do this.

I brought that chipmunk and the traps to the professor who was teaching
the class. I know I had been crying. I sat down with him and said, “I
can’t believe I killed this animal. I cannot do this anymore. I have a
request, which is either to find an alternative kind of project—I’d be
glad to do anything as long as it didn’t involve the capture or killing
of an animal”—and if that was not going to be possible, I would drop out
of class. I was anticipating—because frankly I had had some other issues
come up with the university people, and I was anticipating him saying,
“You do it or you fail,” or, “You do it or you drop out,” or something
like that XE "trapping" \\r "trap1" .

Rowe: These other issues had been related to the explosion of other
ethical issues that had been taking place?

Luke: Yes. But not animal. It was time of war and social upheaval in
America in the 1960s. At any rate, I was shocked in that the professor,
who is clearly a hunter, was also incredibly supportive of me. In fact,
he shared with me an experience he had as a hunter and the last time he
had ever gone hunting for ducks. And he doesn’t hunt ducks anymore
because he felt as though he was injuring ducks that were dying of being
wounded. So he enabled me to take an alternative project on—a behavioral
observation project—and asked for me to study one particular species
that was common and to go to certain lengths to observe this species. I,
in fact, picked skunks XE "skunks" . At any rate, I was really surprised
that he enabled me to not do this and that he was so supportive. I
thoroughly enjoyed not only learning about skunks XE "skunks" but then
trying to find them and follow them and watch them.

I will never forget that experience. But it was also the experience that
woke me up to the issue of conservation and wildlife management as a
harvesting—essentially as a hunter science. Again, at a large university
in the midwest like Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin" , which is a state
university, in a part of the country where the schools let out during
the third or fourth week of November so that everyone can go out and
hunt deer, is very much a part of the culture XE "wildlife management"
\\r "wildmanage2" .

Rowe: Why did you choose therefore—I mean, the University of Wisconsin
XE "University of Wisconsin" was not completely near home. Why there
when it was such antipathetic in some ways? And Aldo Leopold XE
"Leopold, Aldo" , a great conservationist but an avid hunter, a believer
in the nobility and even the necessity of hunting XE "hunting" \\r
"hunt1" .

Luke: Absolutely. Why I chose Wisconsin XE "University of Wisconsin" was
two things. One, I really like the city of Madison XE
"Wisconsin:Madison" and found it to be a progressive, thoughtful,
stimulating community. And another aspect of this is there was another
person who found that city to be attractive too, and I happened to be in
love with her. So there was an element of love that was involved in that
choice.

Rowe: And Aldo Leopold XE "Leopold, Aldo" ? What was it about him that
you were inspired by?

Luke: I think that there is in my—like I mentioned, the dirt, water,
woods—all of those kinds of things to me just feel—I’m most comfortable
in that kind of environment. I think when I first read A Sand County
Almanac XE "Sand County Almanac, and Sketches Here and There, A" I
sensed from someone a shared appreciation of the importance sort of in
our soul of the earth. I didn’t at the time connect that to the issue of
hunting. I think that all of those things were kind of happening to me
right about the same time frame XE "wildlife" \\r "wild1" .

I had another similar experience, but this involves a different kind of
species. I also had at the time a great interest in human behavior and
was taking a lot of classes in psychology. In fact, at the University of
Wisconsin XE "University of Wisconsin" in the 1960s the world renowned
psychologist named Harry Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" was operating in the
primate lab and conducting a series of research projects creating the
“primate model of depression.” So one can’t take classes in psychology
at Harry Harlow’s university and not be inundated with discussions
concerning what we’ve learned about depression in human beings from what
Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" was doing with rhesus monkeys.

This was all happening to me at the same time as the war thing. That I
found absolutely shocking. I’m going to move ahead a few years just to
tie that one together, by the way.

When Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation (book)" was first—when
Peter Singer XE "Singer, Peter" ’s book was first out and I first read
that—I don’t remember the timing of that, late 70s or early 80s—he had—

Rowe: It first came out in 1975.

Luke: I didn’t read it until somewhere around ’78 or ’79, something like
that. There was quite a discussion about Harry Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry"
. In fact, in reading that it reminded me of all of those issues and at
a time of getting used to—I was working. I had just gotten a job at the
local humane society. So advocacy for a living was becoming part of my
life.

I wrote a letter. I found it fascinating to read what Singer XE "Singer,
Peter" was saying about Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" , so I wrote a letter
to Harry Harlow, introducing myself as a former graduate of the
University of Wisconsin XE "University of Wisconsin" and a person who,
although I had never taken a class with him had certainly taken a class
with a number of the people who were working with him in this
laboratory, and had just finished reading this book, and Xeroxing copies
of certain pages to him, and sent them to him and said, “How do you
justify this? I assume that you feel as though you learn something. What
is your reaction to this stuff here and how did you feel about what you
were doing to animals? Did you think of that?” \[I\] kind of just asked
a bunch of questions and sent it to him.

I was, at the time, in a small shelter, what we refer to as the west
coast, but the west coast of Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin" , a small
community. So I’m writing to him in Madison XE "Wisconsin:Madison" .
About three weeks later I received a phone call from the head of the
primate lab at the University of Wisconsin XE "University of Wisconsin"
saying to me, “Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" is in a hospital about to die
in Arizona XE "Arizona" and no longer affiliated with the university,
but my name is Dr. Stephen Suomi XE "Suomi, Stephen" , and I was his
primary graduate student during this period of time. You have some
questions and do you want to talk about it?” I asked him if I could come
to the lab, if he would show me, and would he mind spending some time
with me. In part to my surprise, he said, “Sure.”

We made arrangements and I took a trip to Madison XE "Wisconsin:Madison"
and spent a day with Steve Suomi XE "Suomi, Stephen" , who had taken
over the primate lab in the department of psychology for Harry Harlow XE
"Harlow, Harry" . He was Harlow’s primary graduate student during some
of the work that Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" was doing, most of the work
that he was doing on the primate model of depression. He had told me
that he would show me the entire laboratory if I wanted to, but I had to
take a TB test and go through that. I was frankly quite shocked that he
had allowed—that he responded, that he agreed to meet with me, and that
he would show me the laboratory. In fact, I had anticipated perhaps
being given a snow job or not being shown various parts and wasn’t sure
how I would be treated.

I was shocked to learn of how open he was and how willing he was to
spend time with me. He spent a whole day with me. And here I was, just
somebody from Lacrosse, Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin:Lacrosse" , the manager
of the local humane society, and he spends an entire day with me showing
the laboratory to me and talking with me about the research that they
did and how he felt about it then and how he felt about it now and,
frankly, treated me like a human being. I was quite shocked. I expected
him to be evil, and he wasn’t.

In fact, I happened to have a child who is a handicapped child. He was
describing some of the uses of the research as he saw it and as Harlow
XE "Harlow, Harry" saw it and, in fact, described how some of it he
thought was probably applicable to medications that my son was taking.
That was part of his justification. Clearly one theoretically does these
things to learn.

In fact, he had admitted to me that he would never have done, at that
time, which was ten or fifteen years later—he would never ethically feel
comfortable in doing some of the things that they did with primates back
during the heyday of Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" ’s research.

He impressed me perhaps just as a human being who was going through—my
sense—his own sense of ethics and balance of pain versus gain and what
did he learn and does all gain outweigh all pain. I feel as though I
learned a lot about not only research but perhaps more about that people
aren’t inherently all good or bad and that people who do some things
that in fact may be very cruel can themselves be real human beings and
go through struggles just like the rest of us. I perhaps at that time in
my own development had seen biomedical research scientists as the devil
incarnate. When he showed me his own self and his own struggles and
ethical questions, it taught me a lot about—even if I disagreed with his
ethics, it did teach me that people are not inherently all evil and that
even the most evil things that one could possibly conceive of doing to
another animal—and Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" did some of those
things—that sometimes people did those things and had misgivings about
it.

At any rate, one of the things I remember—sorry to go off on this—was
that at the time that that happened I was also reading an article that
someone had written at another animal organization in which there was a
blanket condemnation of Harry Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" and his protégé,
Stephen Suomi XE "Suomi, Stephen" , who was still there, and making
comments about—some very personally attacking comments about this guy
who I had met. I wrote to her and said, “I’m not a defender of Harry
Harlow XE "Harlow, Harry" . I am not a defender of the use of primates
in psychological research. In fact, that would be one area—I cannot see
a justification for that research at all.” I indicated to her that that
was where I was coming from personally, was exactly that and that I
oppose that kind of research then and now but that some of the ways she
was—comments and the attributions that she was making towards Steve
Suomi XE "Suomi, Stephen" were really not accurate and were
inflammatory.

Because they were more rhetoric than fact and didn’t have a basis in
fact, I thought she was hurting the cause of animals because she was
overstating the case, and that the case itself was strong, and that she
was really not being truthful, and that one of the things that she was
not educating the world with when you speak in hyperbole. But also she
was allowing research people to get off the hook, because if I’m Steve
Suomi XE "Suomi, Stephen" and I’m reading this article about me, I don’t
learn anything from that other than these people are assholes because
they’re making characterizations of me that are clearly not true. It
enables people like Steve Suomi XE "Suomi, Stephen" to discount the
people because there is so much hyperbole and rhetoric and crap in there
that I think people’s natural behavior is to be defensive. It’s like all
these people are clearly crazy. So I thought it was damaging not only
from a factual public education point of view, but that she let
researchers off the hook because she was so overstating the case.

I got a letter back from her. She was a major leader in the animals
rights community and still to some extent now. I got a letter back from
her saying, “You don’t know what you’re talking about XE "animal rights
movement/animal protection community" \\r "rights1" . Stick to dogs and
cats and please don’t ever write me again and don’t ever speak out on
primate issues. You will damage the cause of animal liberation in
America.” It was interesting to me that I had these two letters. I had
this letter from the leader of the animal rights community, which was
basically—it really aggressively dismissed me—and this letter and this
day spent with this researcher, who I thought was the devil incarnate,
in which he was thoughtful and human to me XE "primates" \\r "exper1" .
It was an interesting comparison of the two, even though philosophically
I was clearly in the other camp XE "animal experimentation" \\r "exper1"
.

Rowe: I want to draw together those strands, because we need to get on
to the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" \[Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals\]. It’s okay because it’s important information.

So there you are, effectively wrestling with what would be considered
liberal causes in 1968 and in the 70s in an area—well, Madison XE
"Wisconsin:Madison" , Wisconsin is liberal but outside wouldn’t
necessarily be seen as the heartland of Planned Parenthood and the
various other causes that you’ve been interested in—abortion rights, gun
control, environmental causes, et cetera, number one. Number two, that
you are strongly in favor of animal welfare if not animal rights, and
that you have been exposed in a partial way to somebody in the animal
rights movement and somebody who is the devil incarnate, as you thought,
and neither of them have behaved in the way that you anticipated they
would behave. So you find yourself in sort of an isolated position in a
funny way and a sort of curiously odd man out kind of way.

How has this impacted, you feel, your advocacy for animals and your
humane work? Have you always felt the need to build bridges, to bring
different factions together, as you have said, to encourage the idea
that people are not evil—they’re ignorant or they are not ignorant, they
are capable of change and are wrestling with their own issues?

Luke: Well, I’m going to answer your question by saying I think that—I
believe that people—I know a lot of people who are good and a lot of
people who are not good, and a lot of people who are humane and not
humane, and it almost doesn’t matter. Some of those people have been in
the animal protection movement. I know good people, bad people, humane
people, inhumane people, whose business it is sort of to be humane. I
think that people respond better—actually, before I worked for animal
protection for the local humane society I was an elementary school
teacher. The issue of how children learn is an important part of my
background as well.

I’ve always believed that human beings learn best in an atmosphere where
you treat them with respect regardless whether you agree with them or
not, that interpersonal relationships can—if you can discount some of
the personalization of attributes, you can learn. You can converse, you
can dialogue. If I’m listening and really listening to you, then I can
really learn something. If I’m listening to you but really dismissing
you and thinking of you as someone who’s an idiot, I don’t learn from
you at all. I think teaching and learning are all related like that.

I guess I would say that my view of advocacy is consistent with what I
learned from Steve Suomi XE "Suomi, Stephen" and that other person in
terms of the way I think people learn. I learned a lot from Steve Suomi.
I didn’t learn anything from that other person. I feel as though I had
an impact on Steve Suomi XE "Suomi, Stephen" ’s life. Although I haven’t
seen him and talked with him—again, you couldn’t differ more on the use
of primates in learning than he and I, and yet I feel as though we
taught each other something. I think that that is a good strategy and
the strategy that I personally feel and a strategy that we employ, I
would say, here and what I encourage the people who work with me to
follow, which is to treat people with respect even at the times when you
are strongly disagreeing with them. Inflammatory language are things
that only enable people to not learn and to discount what you have to
say. I think that goes for whether or not you’re trying to teach an
advocacy or expose people to think about what they eat or consumer
choices that they make. I also think it works really well if you’ve got
a shirt that you’re trying to return to Sears because it doesn’t fit. I
think that it always is helpful to interact with people in a manner that
is consistent with what your message is, which is to treat people as
decent people that are worthy of respect. So we tend to look at things
that way at the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and encourage dialogue even with people who
may be traditional enemies.

Rowe: Let’s get to the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . You were—to put it bluntly,
you took a long time to become involved with the shelter as a manager. I
mean, you were twenty-nine and you had become interested in this. Well,
you were interested in animals. Was it just the official working
capacity as a humane officer—had you been volunteering at the shelter?

Luke: I had been volunteering. After I graduated from college, I went
and lived in the woods and the wilderness of northern Wisconsin XE
"Wisconsin" for a while and just hung out in the woods for a while. Then
I decided what I really wanted to do is make it a better world by
working with children, and I went back to graduate school in elementary
education. I taught school for three years and frankly became rather
frustrated with the public school system and quit.

It was at that point in time—I’m a bridge player and I had bridge
partner who—I had volunteered and been a member of the local humane
society, which was just getting started. I had a bridge partner who was
on the board of directors of the local shelter. They had a scandal. I
had quit teaching. He called me and said he knew that I had a real
strong interest in animals and an interest in the humane society and
wondered if I was interested in coming to work for the local shelter,
because what I was doing for a living then was painting houses and
pounding nails. That’s how I started.

Rowe: You were a dry-waller.

Luke: Yes, a painter and a dry-waller.

Rowe: —pounding nails meant carpenter. So you became the shelter
manager. You expanded your role as a humane officer. In 1983 you became
the executive director of the Dane County Humane Society XE "Dane County
(Wis.) Humane Society" , Madison XE "Wisconsin:Madison" , Wisconsin.

Luke: Moved back to where I went to school.

Rowe: Then in 1985 you were employed—you joined the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
. How did you find out about the MSPCA? Was this the Mecca of all humane
societies to work at? Why did you move to Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" ?

Luke: In the course of all of the things that I had done at other
shelters, I had been exposed to a lot of different people within the
animal protection movement, all ends of the spectrum. There was a person
who I had met who was sort of the leader of humane education in America
at the time. Her name was Kathy XE "Savesky, Kathy" Savesky. She had
worked for the Humane Society of the United States \[HSUS XE "Humane
Society of the United States (HSUS)" \]. She had taken a job, had been
hired, been recruited, by Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" Kilroy to come and
work at the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" .

Rowe: People can read about that appointment in Walter XE "Kilroy,
Walter" Kilroy’s added text.

Luke: I had known Kathy XE "Savesky, Kathy" through her work with the
Humane Society of the United States XE "Humane Society of the United
States (HSUS)" . I had heard lots of things about the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
. What I had heard primarily was I had heard about the Angell XE "Angell
Memorial Animal Hospital" Memorial Animal Hospital. I had been a
subscriber to the magazine, Animals XE "Animals (magazine)" magazine. I
was certainly aware of a somewhat controversial aspect of the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
which had to do with its size and its resources. I saw an ad in a trade
journal that they were looking for someone to work in a shelter. I was
interested in perhaps moving to New England. It held a lot of appeal to
me. I contacted the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" .

Rowe: Because of its general liberal aspect?

Luke: Yes. And the fact that it was still—it was potentially a little
more—I don’t know what the word is—cosmopolitan, a little more
progressive in its approach other than some parts of the midwest, and
yet still not New York XE "New York:New York City" City or Los Angeles
XE "California:Los Angeles" because I don’t like living in cities. New
England had been a place that I also associated with very beautiful
country land. That’s always been important to me.

So I contacted the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and Savesky XE "Savesky, Kathy" took over
from there and started to recruit me pretty heavily. She convinced me to
move here to take over the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ’s shelter system—relatively
unsophisticated, in great need of attention and growth. So I came here
to be what was called Director of Shelters to build that program.

Rowe: Judging from my conversation with Bob Cummings XE "Cummings, Bob"
, build it you have. I mean, there’s been a great deal of growth and
improvement in the shelters and they’re continuing. What for you—when
you came there, what did you want to accomplish particularly and what
did you feel needed to be changed, expanded? What were the challenges
that were facing you at that time?

Luke: The MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" had, in part because of its size—to me it had become
quite specialized. In other parts of the country if you said “the
shelter”—if I was referring to something in Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin" and
said “the shelter,” there were a group of people there, whether they
were staff, volunteers, members of the board, they all worked at the
shelter. There was no differentiation between various jobs and everybody
was out to help. If a duck was shot or there was a deer that had been
hit with a car, the entire organization would sort of rally around that.
If there was a dealing with children, then someone who is good at
speaking with children would talk to kids.

At the MSPCA everything was highly specialized. In fact, one of the
things I noticed very quickly is that the people who worked in our
shelters at the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" were really focused on direct animal care
responsibilities and very little else. The idea that a local animal
shelter would do anything other than take in a lost cat and deal with
that lost cat was foreign. The idea that if there was a wildlife
issue—let’s say someone was unhappy about geese on the local golf course
and they were going to start shooting the geese, at the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
at the time, that wouldn’t be an issue that the shelters would be
concerned about because they dealt with lost cats and dogs.

Rowe: So it was not only reactive rather than proactive, it was very
narrowly focused on domestic and companion animals.

Luke: Very narrowly focused. And even on a very small part of companion
animals. Perhaps more significantly, very narrow in terms of the
interaction with communities. To me, a humane society is a local
community resource that has to be completely engaged and part of the
fabric of the community, so that if a kid in the sixth grade or a person
who lives in a house has a question about, “How do we get these damn
bats out of my attic?” that the local shelter is the place that they go
to for that information. If somebody is doing a report in high school
about the use of animals in biomedical research, I want them to call the
local shelter. The makeup of our people was not that that was ever a
part, of not only learning about other issues, but interacting with
people in the community was not something that they did. They stayed in
their building and they took care of the cat that came to them, and that
was it.

Rowe: Was that a function of a failure of initiative from on high, or
was that a problem with recruitment or inertia, or an organization that
really hadn’t been paying attention to its system?

Luke: I’m going to use the word “evolution.” You could call it a
failure. It was a failure, clearly, and it was inertia. It was the way
the organization—

Rowe: We should be honest about the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" .

Luke: Yes. I think that what happened was that as expertise grew,
certain people were assigned certain kinds of responsibilities. So
instead of a local animal shelter interacting with the community about
the geese on the golf course, that would be assigned to headquarters and
a specialist in ethical issues or wildlife issues would be asked to deal
with that, not the shelter. That’s not an effective system and it
doesn’t build strong thoughtful shelter people. In fact, it has a
tendency to attract in the shelters people with very narrow
understandings of the world and without necessarily a humane perspective
but a perspective very limited to “how do I take care of this lost cat?”
So frankly the quality of people, though very nice, their thinking about
the world in terms of big picture and making human beings be a little
more responsible for the consequences of our actions and behavior was
not a part of the staff people that we either attracted, hired, or
retained.

Rowe: So there was an educative quality that you felt was important for
the shelter system rather than simply a crisis-oriented approach.

Luke: Yes. We had clearly neglected our shelters in all kinds of ways.
The physical facilities were abominable. Certainly one of the reasons
why I was hired was that I had had experience at building two shelters
in Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin" .

Rowe: Physically built.

Luke: Yes. Of how to go about a building project.

Rowe: And as a teacher, I presume, as well, that educative quality
there.

Luke: Yes. So the issue of our—no doubt our lack of attention to that
part of our work at the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" was embarrassing. In fact, I
was shocked on my first visit to Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" to see
the headquarters operation of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , which reflected
everything that I had always heard about this organization—its size and
its stature and structure and how nice the headquarters facilities
were—that certainly fit. But as soon as I went into an animal shelter
and saw what a pit it was and the size of the staff and the limited
scope of the function of the shelters, as well as the expertise of the
people in those shelters, it was—in fact, it was clearly a huge and
monumental challenge, not just to rebuild. In fact, there were some who
thought I came here to rebuild the physical structure. That’s the easy
part XE "animal shelters" \\r "shelter1" .

Rowe: Let me just go back to it, because you mentioned beforehand when
you talked about the first time you—I mean, the early stages of applying
for the job—that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" you said was controversially—had a
controversial reputation. Could you tell me what you mean by that?

Luke: The organization had a huge endowment XE "animal rights
movement/animal protection community" \\r "rights2" . At the time that I
was looking to come here, which was in the mid-80s, there had been in
1983—somewhere around 1983—an organization called the Mobilization for
Animals XE "Mobilization for Animals" had started in which there was an
effort being made to encourage the growth of smaller grassroots
entities. In fact, there was a publication that happened. It was the
spring of ’83. It was the culmination of a series of events that led to
a protest, in fact, a national protest, at primate research facilities.
In fact, the organization that had sponsored that, called the
Mobilization for Animals, had published an assembly of nonprofit
charitable organization tax forms in their resources and published,
“This is the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and how much money they have.” There was
clearly a push within the animal rights community to call upon large
established organizations and called them to task and accountability for
the size of their resources and what they were doing to help animals and
an encouragement—that’s putting it bluntly—and almost a flat-out assault
on perceived wealthy organizations to share their funds with other less
endowed or less well-endowed entities.

So it was in connection with the Mobilization for Animals XE
"Mobilization for Animals" in April of 1983 that I first became exposed
to the size of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ’s assets. I had not ever been exposed to
the concept of an endowment where there was—my perception was, like the
rest of the world, that it was essentially a checkbook with \$40 million
in it that they could do anything they want to. The idea of with \$40
million I could save the world. I’m used to working for small charitable
organizations that meeting payroll or hiring a staff person was
considered revolutionary, that people were not just volunteers—

Rowe: But the endowment allots specific moneys for specific tasks.

Luke: I was not aware of it at the time. All I saw was what the rest of
the world saw, which was \$40 million.

Rowe: But you wanted to work for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" . You were clearly aware
of the issues and you were probably on the radical fringe of that.

Luke: Yes, I was. In fact, what got me there was talking with people
like Kathy XE "Savesky, Kathy" Savesky and Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter"
Kilroy, who sat across and said, “We’ve got problems. We’ve been
neglectful. This is an organization that’s about to move into a big
change. The advantage of coming to work here is that you can be not only
a part of that change—and we need good people—but you’ll be affiliated
with good people.” And I had known Kathy XE "Savesky, Kathy" and Walter
XE "Kilroy, Walter" . I had known Kathy but I had certainly heard of
Walter. The idea of working with some of those kinds of intellects and
those talents was very appealing to me.

The other aspect of this was—I certainly remember being told, “And as we
build and as we grow and as we increase the services we provide in the
humane part of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , the one difference between here and what
you’re used to in Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin" is there are resources here.
So you won’t have to be beating the drums all over the world trying to
raise money so you can build your facilities and add to your staff. This
is a place that has resources. If it needs to add to them, there’s a
development department that helps you raise money and you won’t have to
do that.” That was appealing to me because my prior jobs were not only
the operational part of it and the leadership part of it and the
educational part of it but also I had to raise money to build these new
shelters. The appeal of being able to be a part of growth in an
organization that was saying, “We’ve been neglectful”—and that was very
much a part of what they said to me—“We’ve been neglectful of the humane
part of work to a large extent, but we’re going to fix that now.” So
that was very appealing to me XE "funding/finance" \\r "fund1" .

Rowe: Presumably very shortly after you were employed, you felt also the
need to try and justify what the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" was to the very activists, the
animal activists, to sort of flip it around and say, “We’re on your
side. We’re working with you. Join us and support us in our endeavors
and lay off the assaults.”

Luke: Yes. I came at a time—when I came here I came at a time when the
organization was changing. There were all kinds of new people coming in.
It felt very exciting. At the same time, the grassroots animal rights
community for the most part was becoming energized. One of the targets
was the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" because of perceived past ignoring a lot of animal
problems—for example, overpopulation XE "overpopulation of animals" . I
remember when we first came here there was a massive attack on the MSPCA
XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" for our failure to address overpopulation in Massachusetts XE
"Massachusetts" and have well-funded spay/neuter programs and things
like that.

Rowe: And you would agree with them in some ways.

Luke: I would absolutely agree with them. The unfortunate timing of it
was that the complaints that were totally justified happened to come
right at a time when people like Savesky XE "Savesky, Kathy" and Luke
and Martha XE "Armstrong, Martha" Armstrong and a whole slew of other
people were in the process of changing the organization. So just
steering this big ship into change was happening at a time when the
public in the grassroots animal rights community was demanding it as
well. So we were instantly put in the position of being defensive.

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

Rowe: So moving aside with the publicity, the PR relationship problems
there. What was your specific plan in regards to the shelters? Was there
a long-term plan or was it, “We’ve just got to get things better.”

Luke: There was a long-term plan. The first assignment that I got when I
came here July 1st of ’85 was to create a long-term plan for rebuilding
the program and facilities of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" ’s shelter and to present
it to the board by the end of the year.

Rowe: And you did. And what was it?

Luke: We did. At the December meeting of the board I made a major
presentation with a full scheduled seven-year building campaign for not
only physical structure but also for staff and programmatic changes. It
was presented to the board, and the reaction of the board was extremely
positive. They had never seen anything quite like this presented to
them. It was my first meeting with them.

Rowe: Quite like it because it was wide-ranging, it was far-reaching, it
was professionally presented?

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: All three XE "animal shelters" \\r "shelter2" .

Luke: Those were the comments that we received. They immediately said,
“Start to implement.” Actually, one of those projects had already
started. It was one of our smallest shelters. It was on Martha’s
Vineyard XE "Massachusetts:Martha’s Vineyard" . It had already been
started primarily, I believe, because of pushing from local island
residents as opposed to our own initiative. That one took a couple of
years to kind of work its way through the community, in part because the
community didn’t trust the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" .

Rowe: Because?

Luke: The MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" was perceived as off-island people that were
probably taking money from the contributors on the Vineyard and spending
it in the city of Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . There was also a
perception—

Rowe: How did you change that perception?

Luke: We changed it over time, and it didn’t happen quickly. It was
changed by a change in what I would call the openness of the
organization, to listen to people and share information. It used to be—I
remember when I first came here. I remember doing a radio interview with
somebody about dog care and cat care, a call-in show where people would
call and say, “My dog barks at the mailman. How can I stop him from
barking?” Those kind of questions. In the midst of that someone called
and said, “Hi, the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" has \$42 million. Why aren’t you having a
spay/neuter program in the city of Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" ?”
or something like that. I had no information. She rattled off a bunch of
financial information that she had available that I was not aware of. It
caught me off guard and frankly about stuff that I didn’t know about.

After the show I remember coming back to the organization and saying, “I
need to learn about this stuff,” and we didn’t share that information
with our staff. It was information that was acquired because charities
have to file 990 tax forms and those are available to the world, but we
didn’t share them with our staff. We were very closed about the size of
our organization and how we spent our money.

Rowe: Why?

Luke: I think that—I’m not exactly sure. I think there was probably a
combination of not embarrassment over the size of the organization. I
don’t think this organization has ever been ashamed of its resources.
But I think there was somewhat of an arrogant attitude about the less
you know, the less you can find fault with us about, and that’s private
business anyway. There was a closed part of the organization, and we
certainly didn’t want to tell our staff anything because that would only
get the staff upset. I think that was the basic perception.

That was not—I believe just the opposite, that in fact there is nothing
to be ashamed of in terms of size. And we are a public charity, which to
me implies that we are accountable for what we do. I think one of the
first ways that one has to be accountable is at least to someone who
sends you ten bucks that they know what you did with the money and did
you use it for good reason and how else are you using your other money?

Rowe: You presented this to the powers that be as a way forward?

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: And their response was?

Luke: I was not alone in that. In fact, this again at the time of the
Mobilization for Animals XE "Mobilization for Animals" and other
assaults on the organization, which we were put in a very defensive sort
of stature.

Rowe: But you must have been—let me just go back. You must have been
un-surprised by this. Were other people surprised? When you said the
defensive position, what was the response of the leadership?

Luke: I think the feeling was that these people will go away, that once
in a while somebody raises an issue that may be awkward to answer, but
they ask the question and then they go away. I think that they were
totally unprepared for a local suburban Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston"
newspaper to do a four-part front page exposé on the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
’s size, finances, addressing overpopulation, as well as the salaries of
their upper level staff, which are published as part of the tax form as
well.

I think that what often happened is that the two people who were most
out front and exposed to the questions were Kathy XE "Savesky, Kathy"
Savesky—three really—Kathy XE "Savesky, Kathy" Savesky, Martha XE
"Armstrong, Martha" Armstrong, and me—people associated with the humane
community and also in a very public forum. Martha XE "Armstrong, Martha"
Armstrong was our head of advocacy and our chief lobbyist at the time,
so she’s standing in front of the state legislature who from time to
time would ask questions about this as well as we were advocating for a
piece of legislation.

The good news about it, I guess, is that the organization that was so
closed really recognized that you can’t do that. That just doesn’t cut
it and that we began basically first of all sharing the information with
our own staff so that Martha XE "Armstrong, Martha" , Kathy XE "Savesky,
Kathy" , Luke, Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" Kilroy at least had the—we
weren’t being barraged by questions from people who knew more about the
organization’s finances than we did. Secondly, starting to share that
kind of information with our own members and donors so that they saw
this is the size of the organization, this is how much money we took in
last year, these are the ways we spent that money. We started to become
much more up front about sharing that information to the point where I
think even now we are perhaps as open as any—certainly as any large
organization about our priority decisions, our choices, and our
finances. In fact, even some of our critics who would probably enjoy
skewering us at times have in the annual printing, if you will, of the
financial status of organizations—we generally receive fairly high
marks, for example, in the balance of how we use our money in terms of
program and overhead.

Rowe: Fairly high marks because the percentage ratio is good?

Luke: Yes. Because this is an organization that does—we are a large—we
are, no doubt—we are big with—\$37 or \$35 million dollars, something
like that, is our annual expense budget. In terms of balance of
administrative and fundraising costs versus program costs, we’re proud
of the fact that we spend our money on animals and on hands-on care.

Rowe: This is what Bob Cummings XE "Cummings, Bob" is saying. He
said—not only when Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" Kilroy was also mentioning
it—that not only was the actual MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" to a certain extent until
relatively recently in its history forbidden from actually engaging in
advocacy or lobbying by its status, but that whilst other organizations
may have the luxury of being advocates for animals, the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
has a mandate to look after them when they’re injured. So therefore it’s
got a—it requires the day-to-day running of care and shelters.

Luke: That’s a very expensive thing to do. And yet—because it does take
a lot of time. An injured cat absorbs a lot of energy, time, and
resources to take care of it. In the same regard, I think that it’s
important that we not allow that kind of an expectation of us to excuse
us from not being involved in other issues, whether they be advocacy
issues, wildlife issues, issues related to animals’ use in biomedical
research and genetic engineering, and all of the other issues that are
current on the day. I think that we can’t ignore those responsibilities
as well XE "funding/finance" \\r "fund2" .

Rowe: That statement—has that been met? How has that been met with by
the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" hierarchy over the years?

Luke: I think that it’s been—I think where we are now is it’s almost
assumed to be of course true.

Rowe: That is not always the case.

Luke: It is not always—it was not always the case because there were
times in which taking positions on those kinds of issues was—well, just
not a lot of attention was paid to it. This is an organization whose
strength became very much focused around veterinary medicine. Again,
evolution. When we talk about ignoring, for example, of the humane part
of our work, I think that began in part because we tried this animal
hospital thing, and we were back in 1917 or so. We managed to get lucky
and have some real strong leaders there and it was successful. Success
breeds success. They were attracting people, the organization put
emphasis on it, it grew very big. Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal
Hospital" Memorial Animal Hospital became the center for veterinary
medicine in the world. And when it began in 1917 the president at the
time was quoted as saying, “This will never be a big part of this. It
will never supplant the other important parts of the work. This is just
a little thing we’re doing because Harvard XE "Harvard University"
closed their veterinary school.”

Yet when you move into the 1970s and 80s at the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , you really
felt as though this was an organization that was very good at veterinary
medicine and a failure at humane work. I think that, again, part of the
belief on the part of the upper management and leadership was, “We need
to address that issue, and let’s put some resources into the humane part
of our work.” That is an easy thing to say, and then it requires that
the resources be allocated that way XE "veterinary medicine" \\r "vet1"
.

Rowe: And somebody to know how to do it.

Luke: Yes. Exactly.

Rowe: And that’s why they hired you.

Luke: Right.

Rowe: Let’s be very specific now, because I want to move onto another
issue. Of the seven-year program that you implemented in the late 80s,
what was achieved in that program, specific achievements?

Luke: Probably the most physically observable part of it is the
rebuilding of facilities. We’ve rebuilt our Springfield XE
"Massachusetts:Springfield" entity, Brockton XE "Massachusetts:Brockton"
, Martha’s Vineyard XE "Massachusetts:Martha’s Vineyard" , Nantucket XE
"Massachusetts:Nantucket" , major renovation at our farm in Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" , and also renovations to our Cape shelter, our
Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" shelter, and our Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" shelter. Cape, Boston, and Methuen are our three
old places. We are in the process now of planning new building in
Methuen, a new shelter in Boston, and another renovation on the Cape. So
in terms of physical structure—although it’s been a lot longer than
seven years—

Rowe: Exactly. Was that personnel? Was that money? Was that energy being
consumed by other issues?

Luke: Yes, yes, yes. I think that there were a lot of other issues going
on. It was not as simple as it seemed to just say, “We are going to
build this shelter,” so that I devoted a hundred percent of my time
towards the plan of how to do a shelter. It’s just much more complicated
than that. In the meantime, we’re also trying to—the thing that I’m
perhaps more proud of than anything is to build the program and the type
of people that we have working for us.

Rowe: Let’s move on to that issue. You’ve mentioned in your
questionnaire that that’s the thing you’re most proud of, “the impact I
think I’ve had on the people who work in shelters.” We’ve already got
some idea of the people who used to work in shelters when you first came
about it. Tell me about who you were looking for, what qualities they
had, and how you got them.

Luke: I think the aspect of changing people, as they say, is not a
simple one, because I think the people that we want to attract to come
and work for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" are not individuals that are necessarily
drawn to us because we’re big or we’re old or we can pay you a pretty
decent wage or we have a retirement plan. Nobody comes and works in
animal protection and retires in a place. We kid about that. We do have
a retirement plan here. There’s a group called the Quarter-Century Club.
That’s for employees that have been here for twenty-five years. We were
talking about that the other day. There has never been a shelter person
in the Quarter-Century Club.

Rowe: Because it’s so distressing?

Luke: Yes. It takes a lot out of you.

Rowe: So you didn’t want careerists, in other words.

Luke: Yes. And perhaps—I wouldn’t say I didn’t want careerists. What I
wanted were people who were passionate, who were articulate, and people
who cared about animals and were also comfortable in working with
people.

Rowe: That was the educative quality. That was a very important
component—the ability to promote animal welfare as well as to take care
of animals XE "animal shelters" \\r "shelter3" .

Luke: Right. Within the context of how the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" feels about
things. We are not, for example, the kind of organization that is going
to do a lot of civil disobedience. In fact, we believe—and part of our
organizational history and evolution is that we have the strongest law
enforcement powers of any humane organization in the country. Our law
enforcement staff are commissioned state police officers. We have a lot
of mandates in the state statutes that enable us to have quite a bit of
power. It means that for us to have that power, we are a law enforcement
agency, and yet we receive no state funding. We are mandated to do these
things, but those powers could be withdrawn from us at any time.

Rowe: Would anybody even think that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" should be encouraging
civil disobedience? Was that something that you were accused of?

Luke: Yes. Well, there are a lot of people who would like for us to do
that. There are times when some of our staff would like to participate
in more activist related kinds of activities.

Rowe: By activist related activities, you mean specifically those which
break the law.

Luke: Including those, but a whole slew of others as well.

Rowe: That you feel would be inappropriate for the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
.

Luke: Correct.

Rowe: Which would include?

Luke: We would risk our law enforcement powers if this organization or
its staff in any way, shape, or form was looking at issues that violated
the law. Because we are, by definition, a Criminal Justice Agency—and
that’s capital C, capital J, capital A—defined in the state statutes or
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" general laws, we have to be—and we
respect and honor our law enforcement powers. They enable us to do a lot
of stuff.

I don’t want to give the impression that that’s the controlling force
for us. That’s certainly a factor. I think what the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
tries to do on our advocacy things is to put us in a position to make
change in the way we feel is the most effective way to make change. We
believe that’s done by working within the system. If we’re outside the
system—which we are frequently, outside the system—the goal is always to
do things that will attract, if you will, mainstream people into our
cause and not necessarily push mainstream people out the window because
they’re concerned that we are an extremist group that are calling for an
abolition of all animal uses on the planet and all of that.

Rowe: Do you personally see a role—before we get back to the shelter. I
don’t want to get lost on this. Do you personally see a role for civil
disobedience?

Luke: Yes, I do. I personally do, but I wouldn’t at this point in time
because I believe in greater gain. Because of the position I have, it is
impossible for me to divorce myself from my role within the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
. I don’t feel as though it is necessarily a compromise for me to not
pursue civil disobedience. Because of my role within the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
I believe I can be most effective—

Rowe: I wasn’t actually thinking about you personally. I was thinking
that personally you don’t have a problem with other people who would do
civil disobedience.

Luke: I do have a problem with violent or destructive acts. I believe
that’s inconsistent with our message, and I believe it harms our
message. So I don’t believe in bombings or in destruction.

Rowe: Of property.

Luke: Correct. Or animals or people XE "legislation and law" \\r
"legal1" .

Rowe: That goes without saying. But as a builder, you would—“I had to
put the thing up. Why the hell burn it down anyway?” You can scratch
that from the record XE "civil disobedience" \\r "legal1" .

Let’s go back to the shelters. You wanted to have people with passion
and who had the ability to educate as well as to care for animals. You
were concerned—you didn’t want people who saw the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
as a vehicle for civil disobedience and might be—that was an
inappropriate attitude for a shelter person to work for.

Luke: Unless someone was capable of recognizing that the organization as
a whole can do more good in a different direction. There are a lot of
very radical people working within the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" and within our shelter
system, but they recognize and I think believe—I mean, if they stay with
us, they believe there is greater good to be accomplished as being a
part of this very mainstream, rather moderate, or some would say
conservative depending on where you fit on the spectrum, organization.
So we do have large numbers of people here who are staunch vegans and
anti-vivisectionists, and yet this is not as an organization a vegan
organization.

Rowe: Let’s skip forward then and maybe you can assess this. Give us a
couple of instances—it only has to be a couple of instances—as \[to\]
how you feel the shelters have improved from what they were when you
took over. It could be just a statistic or it could be an actual case
study of how something was handled today in a way that it wasn’t handled
in 1985.

Luke: I guess I can certainly point to the aspect of—if I were going to
share a statistic XE "overpopulation of animals" , I would share with
you that in the last eight years in a row we’ve set a record at the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" for adoptions. So within—if one looks at the animals that are
coming to us and how successful we are at caring for those animals and
in engaging people to come into our building and work with us, and our
willingness to be flexible with people, that certainly is reflected in
the number of lives that leave our building alive that used to go into a
barrel dead. Although—and that is a very important statistic.

I think that the part that again—and I focus back on the kind of people
that we have. We have staff people now who relish opportunities to have
volunteers and the media XE "media" come in our door XE "public
relations/outreach" . It used to be—and others come to us and ask
questions. It used to be very much that volunteers were a pain in the
ass and the media basically wants to ask the embarrassing questions and
attack us because of a dog that was put to sleep or why we weren’t doing
spay/neuter programs. Now we relish the media’s engagement with us,
nourish our relationships with local media outlets, and in general have
become the place in most of our communities where people come for
questions about animals.

Just to pick an example. At our farm up on the border of New Hampshire
XE "New Hampshire" —

Rowe: Methuen.

Luke: Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen" . We made some changes, based
on another philosophical belief that I have, which is—

Rowe: Let me just—you call it a farm because it’s a home for large
animals.

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: Particularly horses.

Luke: Yes. It is a farm, too. It looks like a farm, smells like a farm,
acts like a farm. It is a farm. It also has a small animal shelter on it
with dogs and cats.

In the late 80s we also embarked on a change in the application of
resources within the humane part of our work where essentially I didn’t
want to have a lot of staff people that worked in offices in this big
building in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . To me, the best work we
can do is out in the fields. So we started to lay off, if you will,
administrative staff and invest those moneys in outlying people.

In Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen" , one of the things when we look
at recruiting staff, we made an investment in that particular community
and tried to hire a group of staff people who didn’t necessarily have
any background in animal related stuff but who were articulate folks who
were good at writing and were capable and felt passionate about life,
whatever aspect of life. It didn’t matter to me if they were
environmentalists or were engaged in protecting civil rights or
children’s rights or animal rights or whatever, that they were capable
of taking passion and articulating it to the world. We started hiring
people whose expertise was in graphics and education and TV and radio.

We hired this—Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen" was a place we made
some initial investments in. We laid off a couple of staff people here
in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" in the administrative role, and we
hired someone whose background was in graphic design. She was just an
artist and young, but she felt passionate about animals. We hired her.
In five years—and at the same time we were trying to interact with both
schools and the business community, and not necessarily—obviously one of
the issues in engaging the business community has to do with things
financial. But we’re part of the community. What happened in Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" —a couple of interesting things.

First of all, when websites were first becoming the rage, the town in
Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen" set up a website for the town, a
government website. There was a page for schools and a page for police
and fire protection and a page for the chamber of commerce and a page
for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" . They had four pages on their website. It was a page
that—we were there because it was a place people could come to, to the
farm, on a Sunday afternoon and visit goats and cats and dogs and see
horses running a field. We opened ourselves up to a lot of those kinds
of things.

Then about two years ago this person we hired—who was just this kid who
liked to draw and had this passion for animals—was named the
businesswoman of the year in the regional chamber of commerce and got an
award for this from our member of the House of Representatives in that
district. All that had happened was that the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" became part of
that community.

Once a year we hosted the gathering of the chamber of commerce in the
barn, for crying out loud. We’ve got pigeons flying overhead with these
people who are used to going to the fancy restaurants. They’re coming to
the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" ’s barn where there are horses that have been abused
and pigs that we’ve picked up that got dumped off on the highway and
dogs and cats around. To me it was—and we have a local cable television
show that’s coming out monthly, reaching 250,000 people a year, from
essentially a bunch of young people who were just energetic about trying
to spread the word about animal care and changing the way people reacted
in terms of whether it was the way they cared for their cat or what to
do with the raccoon that’s in the chimney or what to do about the geese
on the golf courses or the pigeons that are pooping on people’s statues,
and trying to sort of just spread a general message of human beings have
a responsibility for the consequences of our action. Let’s change the
way we think XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "pr1" .

What happens, of course, is when you start to attract people that are
good, you attract—and do good things—you attract other people that are
good. I use Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen" as a model because it was
the place where we—in part maybe because of luck—we invested money to
attract people, but we got some good people. They attracted more good
people and more good people and more good people.

Rowe: And there was a degree of autonomy there?

Luke: Yes. And we changed. In fact, one of the principal things that I
did and feel proud of—it’s not uncontroversial—is that everything at the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" used to be controlled by headquarters. All seven of our
shelters were exactly the same. They wore the same clothes, used the
same forms, did the same things, opened the same hours. They did exactly
the same thing.

We released them from that responsibility because the communities were
so different and enabled our shelters to create, based on the needs of
their community—the leadership and the people there—to add volunteers as
they could manage them, to do different things, to the point now where
all of our shelters have almost a—there’s really different colors at
each of our facilities.

Rowe: Like a franchise.

Luke: Yes, almost. Different hours, different activities. If you were to
say to me, “So what hours are the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" shelters open?” I would
have to say, “All seven of them are open different hours.” But what’s
happened in Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen" was the growth of good
people attracting good people.

Others of our shelters have not been as successful, and in part that’s
because the steamroller worked in the Methuen XE "Massachusetts:Methuen"
because good people attract good people. Even when you create a good
atmosphere for growth and creativity. But we’ve gotten so much better in
all of our facilities just because we’ve attracted so many more
thoughtful, passionate people who truly care about animals and love to
talk about it XE "animal shelters" \\r "shelter4" .

Rowe: That’s good. You’ve made that very clear. I noticed that in 1985,
the same time you were employed by the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , that there was a
program conducted by the WSPA \[World Society for the Protection of
Animals XE "World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA)" \] on
the study of cruelty to animals on people. Was that anything that you
were involved with later on or was that something—

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: Because this, of course, was something of interest to you as a
teacher.

Luke: Yes. I will never forget the first cruelty case I ever went on in
Wisconsin XE "Wisconsin" , the first serious cruelty case involving a
dog. As I was in the middle of that investigation I ran into a friend of
mine in the very same house that I was conducting an investigation. He
worked for county social services dealing with child abuse. It struck me
as being odd at the time that I ran into this guy.

Yet I really did learn that the people who are creating the most
harmful—intentional harmful, the malicious folks of this world—were not
people who would set the neighbor’s cat on fire in the morning and then
go to church and become part of Kiwanis and be regular human beings
during the rest of their lives.

Rowe: Those are the doctors. No, scratch that. \[Laughter\].

Luke: So the whole relationship kind of became physically apparent to me
as I kind of dealt with some of these folks. That was a change for me. I
was not used to—I don’t come from a law enforcement background. I come
from a pretty gentle family. One of the hardest parts I found about my
early career was when I was in a position of enforcing the law and
interacting with people who were dangerous, who were blatantly three
steps beyond irresponsible. The issue of the relationship between humans
and animals and crimes against both is something that I feel very
strongly about. I certainly noticed it in the early part of my career.

But then, in fact, a number of years ago—I shouldn’t say a number of
years ago. About six years ago, \[I\] really came to the conclusion that
this was something that warranted more in-depth scientific evaluation. I
had an associate, a friend, a colleague in the sociology department at
Northeastern XE "Northeastern University" \[University\] with whom the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" developed a relationship. We did an in-depth evaluation of our
experiences in prosecuting cruelty to animals, the negligent—not
negligent—the malicious, violent cruelty to animal cases, and who those
people were in terms of the other crimes that they had committed.
Because we are a criminal justice agency here, and because we have quite
a history of prosecuting animal cruelty, we had a great deal of access
to records concerning people’s other behavior. Our relationship with
Northeastern XE "Northeastern University" is certainly something that I
feel very strongly about and, in fact, have to say very much enjoy doing
this scientific evaluation of cruelty to animals and what other crimes
these people were committing.

Rowe: You mentioned in your questionnaire that that was one achievement
you valued—moving scientific information into the realm of animal
protection work. Is that specifically what you’re referring to?

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: How does the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" see this as maybe perhaps an ongoing program
working with law enforcement outside of its own law enforcement
protection or working with the general police? What is the future? What
was the growth of that program—if there was a program—and what are the
future possibilities of really using this to protect children, protect
animals, protect women?

Luke: The MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (MSPCA)" for 130 years has basically been saying what a lot
of the humane community has said, which is as people treat animals, so
they treat each other. So the scientific evaluation that began—the first
three-part study with Northeastern XE "Northeastern University" that was
concluded about two years ago—involved first a characterization of
cruelty to animals in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" based on our
records; secondly, an evaluation of the individuals that were committing
those crimes and what else they were doing; thirdly, an examination of
what we called the secondary victims of animal crime—if you will, the
guardians of the dogs that were being shot, the guardians of the cats
that were being burned or the horses that were being stabbed. So we
looked at how do the people who have those animals in their family, how
are they reacting to this incredible violent act towards their animals.
We looked at battered women and the nature of crimes against animals in
houses where domestic violence is occurring. Those papers have all been
published in scientific journals.

Where we went next with the project and where we still are now—we are,
in fact—my partner in this is a sociologist. His name is Dr. Arnie
Arluke XE "Arluke, Arnold" at Northeastern XE "Northeastern University"
. We also wanted to examine what about the enforcers. Dr. Arluke did
an—we’re calling it an ethnography. This is a sociological study of our
law enforcement officers and how this work is impacting on them and how
have they changed in the course of their career in investigating these
kinds of cases. We not only looked at the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , we also went
to New York XE "New York:New York City" and did interviews with the
people that are there. That study is in progress right now XE
"legislation and law" \\r "legal2" .

The other thing that we wanted to look at was start to develop an
understanding of how does cruelty to animals, if you will, or violence
in any form start to develop. What’s going on with children? The
original study we did, it was our goal to examine children that had
committed violent acts to animals and see what happened to them when
they became adults. There were a number of obstacles that didn’t allow
us to complete that as we had desired, most notably the fact that child
records are very, very restrictive in terms of what you can learn unless
parents give permission. We found parents totally unwilling to allow us
to examine other behavior on the part of their children if we had gotten
involved in a cruelty case with them. But we wanted to examine kids.

What we did is we started a project in which we looked at childhood
experiences with animals. One of the things that we had suspected is
that in America almost all little boys go through a period of time which
I’ll call “exploration,” where they take tadpoles out of the water or
they use magnifying glasses to burn ants on the sidewalk or they capture
birds (or flies are really common) and pull their wings off—acts of real
cruelty on the part of six-, seven-, eight-year-old little boys that are
pretty normal. In fact, that’s very normal in terms of the way little
boys develop in our culture. Little girls sometimes but not nearly with
the same kind of frequency as boys.

Well, the question becomes: What is that all about? And perhaps more
significantly, why does it stop? Or when does it stop? This is something
we’re in the middle of looking at now, the goal being if we can
understand the stopping mechanisms—is this the development of empathy?
Is it because they get caught by their parents? By the way, clearly the
answer to that is no. Parents aren’t aware that their little boys do
these things. Does peer pressure stop them from doing it? Clearly no.
Peer pressure seems to encourage these kinds of behavior. But something
happens to most people at some age—still needing to be studied—that just
makes it not cool to capture a bird and pull its feathers off while it’s
still alive. What we’re trying to do is understand sort of that
phenomenon and why does it stop. We suspect it has to do with the
building of the learning of empathy and the recognition that when you
harm things there is something not nice—there’s something bad about that
with most people. So we’re trying to understand that.

Obviously, one of the goals is not only to understand why it stops
normally with most people but why in some people doesn’t it stop at all.
There are some who say, “Well, that’s because of detachment disorder and
some people never learn to attach themselves to anything.” In part this
becomes a child psychology issue as well as a sociological issue XE
"children and animals" \\r "child1" .

Those are issues we’re in the process of studying right now. It’s sort
of the next step in what I perceive to be unfortunately a forever
permanent of the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , which is to study what’s happening with
animal cruelty to try to find interventions to stop it.

What we did with the parts of the study that had been published is we’ve
shared them. One of our principal goals was to change the criminal
justice approach, the system’s approach to animal cruelty, which is
essentially it’s just a dock. Because too frequently we hear—we bring a
case into court that’s just the most terrible thing you could ever
imagine done to a dog, and we hear a judge say, “I love you guys, but
we’ve got rapists and murderers and assaulters here—the courts are
over-full. This is just a dog. We need to move this case along.” The
people end up getting—cases get dismissed. The reality is and the reason
we started publishing our research was to show the criminal justice
system, “You bet you’ve got rapists and assaultists coming to you in
your court. Sometimes they come to you because they got caught for
animal crime.” These are the same people. They may come in because
they’ve been kicking their kid around or maybe they robbed the local
liquor store or maybe they set the neighbor’s cat on fire. They’re the
same people.

So the materials were shared. It was interesting, as we finished the
project and started publishing stuff and sharing it, for example with
the attorney general’s office, it was like, “Okay, animal thing. That’s
kind of interesting.” But the more they learned and saw the credibility
of the science and the individuals involved—and frankly it helped to
have criminologists from Northeastern XE "Northeastern University" and
nationally-known folks involved in this study—then pretty soon the
attorney general’s office is calling us and saying, “Can we get fifteen
copies of that study? We want to share them with the District Attorneys
Association XE "District Attorneys Association" .” And somebody else
calling and saying, “Hi, I assemble materials for the Judicial Training
Council XE "Judicial Training Council" .” This is a council in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" that trains judges. “Can we get some
copies of that study?” And the New England Police Information Network XE
"New England Police Information Network" —this is really a
federally-funded police network—asked and is doing a front-page story on
our study. And the FBI XE "Federal Bureau of Investigation" now starting
to incorporate animal cruelty in their tracking of human criminals. So
we sense that society in general—the result of this is that society in
general is taking animal cruelty more seriously.

Now, the debate, of course, in some people’s minds—and mine too—is we
think society should take animal cruelty seriously for its own sake. But
sometimes society needs to know that there’s a human implication here. I
don’t mind using that XE "legislation and law" \\r "legal3" .

Rowe: Okay. That’s very thorough. That’s answered my questions about
that.

Luke: Am I talking too much?

Rowe: No, no. It’s fine. You’re answering my questions before I have a
chance to ask them XE "cats" \\r "cat1" .

The Year of the Cat XE "Year of the Cat" campaign. Now, you’re very
proud of that.

Luke: Very XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "cat1" .

Rowe: Apart from being a great song title—

Luke: Oh, hated the song. \[Laughter\]. Loved the title.

Rowe: What was it and when was it and what did it achieve?

Luke: A Saturday afternoon I was at one of our shelters in 1991. I
watched someone come in with a box. In the box was a mom and four
kittens with a lady and her little kid. She was bringing the cats to the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" shelter in the middle of summer when we’re deluged with cats
and kittens. She said, “It keeps having kittens. We don’t want this
anymore.” The little kid is saying, “Mommy, Mommy, can we keep
Fluffy?”—that was the mom—and Mom saying, “No.” The shelter staff people
\[were\] saying, “You know, we can help you, low cost spay/neuter. We
can help you get the cat spayed and you can keep the mom cat and stop
having the kittens.” The kid is saying basically, “Mommy, Mommy, can we
keep Fluffy?” and she saying, “No, I’ve had it. I don’t want these cats
anymore.”

So the shelter staff person was filling out the records just to get them
to sign the cats over and said, “There are four kittens, right? Mom had
four kittens?” The lady said, “No, she actually had five.” Unfortunately
I’ve heard this story too many times with too many people over too many
years, because I know what was going to happen next. The shelter person
said, “What happened to the other cat, the other kitten?” The lady said,
“It’s a male and we’re keeping it.” So here was this eight-year-old cat
that had six litters of kittens, that clearly the child was attached to
this cat. But the whole aspect of getting this animal sterilized was so
monumental to this family, and this whole pregnant female thing, that
she was going to keep one of the male kittens. In effect, what she did
is she traded in her old female cat that this kid loved for a new model
that happened to be a male that probably got lost and let outside and
probably didn’t survive its first year.

Rowe: The point was that she felt that the male wouldn’t be responsible
for producing kittens.

Luke: Yes. And it was cute. It was a kitten and the mom was an old cat.
It was eight years old. It had already had six litters of kittens. It
was just a cat. To me it was an example of the fact that cats get so
little respect in so many different ways. We hear people say, “I’ll pay
you ten bucks for the dog, but cats I can get for free.” Cats get half
the level of veterinary care that dogs do. Cats are second-class pets in
America XE "spaying and neutering" \\r "spay1" .

At any rate, when I saw this one particular episode in Methuen XE
"Massachusetts:Methuen" , it happened to grab me on the way home. As I
was driving home I was thinking we need to do more about cats. We pay
too much attention to dogs at the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , and we need to do more
things about cats. Nineteen-ninety-two is going to be the Year of the
Cat XE "Year of the Cat" , and we’ll develop programs all across the
Society and make it the Year of the Cat.

So we started working on that. What we decided is every part of the
MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" would do something. The people who were in charge of our mail
would change our postal slug to say “Spay or Neuter Your Cat.” Our
accounting department and paychecks would put a little ticket on it
saying “Don’t forget to put an identification tag on your cat.”
Everything we would do—everybody could do something. The maintenance
department could help and look at new ways of housing cats in hospitals
and just all kinds of things.

We were at a meeting with other humane groups later that year just
talking about plans. I introduced to those groups—this happened to be
the HSUS XE "Humane Society of the United States (HSUS)" —three of the
other large humane groups—the American Humane Association XE "American
Humane Association" , and the American SPCA XE "American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA)" . The four of us were meeting
and talking about plans and things we were doing. I told the group about
the Year of the Cat XE "Year of the Cat" in 1992. Someone in the room—I
don’t even remember who it was—said, “Boy, it would be kind of fun to do
that on a national scale, but we can’t make that happen in just a couple
of months. Would you consider postponing the Year of the Cat for one
year and we can have a national campaign?” So the Year of the Cat became
1993. So we decided together—these four organizations—to do a national
campaign on the Year of the Cat XE "Year of the Cat" .

Our goal was really to engage all animal organizations—humane groups,
animal control, veterinary groups, cat groups, animal rights groups,
conservative groups, liberal groups, crazy groups, normal groups,
abnormal groups, whatever, government—to expand their whole sphere of
programs and protection to cats. Part of my goal was to—not necessarily
for these four groups. These four groups were going to be catalysts and
facilitators, but that the real hard core work had to happen on local
humane society levels and with local cat breeders and veterinarians and
all of these things on a local level. We just needed to stimulate that
behavior.

The other part of this is I didn’t want—a personal thing for me. I
didn’t want us to spend any money on going to meetings. So I was named
the chair of this committee. My goal at the very beginning was—even if
it took us a year to plan, we really had a year to plan it and a year to
implement it, I didn’t want to have one meeting. And we did. We didn’t
have one meeting about this. We had a lot of conference calls and
exchanged a lot of information in paper.

But what we did was reached out to 5,000 animal shelters and fifty state
veterinary associations, and because the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" has a link to the
veterinary community with one of America’s most well-known prestigious
animal hospitals, we reached strongly to the veterinary community, and
touched with animal control and humane groups. We have relationships
with cat groups. Six states had their governors sign Year of the Cat XE
"Year of the Cat" proclamations. People did their own thing. We
basically collected materials and put together a bunch of ideas. \[We\]
got Garfield, the guy who writes Garfield, to be our primary spokes-cat,
and a famous cat artist to do a poster for Year of the Cat. So it was a
campaign that was done at minimal overhead to encourage local action.

What started to happen across the country was we started to see—the
American Veterinary XE "veterinary medicine" Medical Association XE
"American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)" , which is kind of an
old-fashioned, kind of stodgy group of veterinarians, put a picture of a
cat with an identification tag on the cover of the Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association XE "Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association" and devoted one of their annual national
conferences to the welfare of cats. When the AVMA did that, that was
like—I remember running down the hallway here with—because I had nagged
the editor of that magazine to put a cat on the cover with an
identification tag on it—and running around the hallway saying, “The
AVMA has a cat with a collar and a tag on the cover XE "veterinary
medicine" !” They sent me a picture of that XE "public
relations/outreach" \\r "pr2" .

It just felt like it was such a hard core grassroots entity XE
"funding/finance" . I remember at one point in time in a national animal
rights publication somebody did a letter to the editor attacking the
Year of the Cat XE "Year of the Cat" and saying, “These four
organizations—they probably made a million dollars on this and probably
went on all kinds of big meetings and stayed in fancy hotels.” It was
one of the most—I probably made a mistake, and this is where my own
needs overcame me. I responded to that letter—I probably should have let
it lie—and said, “Not one meeting, not one fundraising activity, not one
trip and a hotel, not one junket, nothing. It was all done locally. Our
goal was to facilitate.” I did write that letter and then somebody else
wrote about, “Well, the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" has \$60 million.” Somebody
turned that into a bashing opportunity, but I felt good about it.

Rowe: I’m going to end the tape there.

\[End Tape 1, Side B; Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Rowe: To sort of do a long conclusion here. One of the things that you
mention in your questionnaire is some of the disappointments, some of
the negatives. I’d just like to sort of explore those for a while.
You’ve already touched on some of the aspects of it.

The infighting among animals groups—a source of contention in and of
itself. I’m more particularly interested in how you feel coalitions can
work. Clearly something like the pound seizure laws XE "animal rights
movement/animal protection community" \\r "rights3" , anti-trapping
initiatives, and other types of programs have been an effective use of
coalitions, as has Henry Spira XE "Spira, Henry" ’s coalitions against
the Draize tests and the cat experiments in New York XE "New York:New
York City" City and getting Revlon XE "Revlon" to change its experiments
on rabbits and other cosmetic companies. How would you like to see the
organizations working together, and what does the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
do in working with other organizations, animal advocacy organizations, I
should say XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "lobby1" ?

Luke: I view the work that Henry Spira XE "Spira, Henry" did as being an
incredible example of one individual who changed the world and somehow
brought all kinds of people together and an incredible diverse group of
people. Henry, I would say, is one of my idols. His loss was, to me, a
huge loss to all of us who knew him, weirdo guy that he was. To me Henry
was one of those who—I thoroughly enjoyed everything we ever did with
him. To me a strategic thinker like nobody I’ve ever seen. Henry was
very appealing even to the most conservative members of the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
leadership.

We were a part of his coalitions and still continue to be a part of his
coalitions, even though philosophically we may be very much apart. But
I’ve always liked Henry’s XE "Spira, Henry" strategy of bringing people
together through discussion and moving people in the direction of
constructive action with helping people kind of have a win-win and
always sort of keeping eyes on the prize and thanking people when they
made progress, even a little step. Henry was clearly an abolitionist,
but he believed in little steps. When the USDA \[U.S. Department of
Agriculture XE "U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)" \] acted on face
branding, he thanked them. When they did an act on something else, he
went after them.

Yet there was always this feeling—I sat in on a lot of meetings with
Henry Spira XE "Spira, Henry" in a lot of different places, and I always
felt as though the people that—if he was sitting across the table from
somebody from Procter & Gamble XE "Procter & Gamble" , he was willing to
give them as long as they continued to make progress along a certain
line and to thank them and congratulate them publicly for their
progress. It was not certainly—Procter & Gamble XE "Procter & Gamble"
perhaps being one of the most controversial entities.

The MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" enjoys coalitions like that, coalitions where there is
a clear target and a clear message, where in general we feel as though
they serve animals or the actions of people on a long-term basis. We
don’t—I don’t think that this is an organization that is ego-driven.
This is not an organization that necessarily feels as though we have to
share or own the limelight. I think there are a lot of things that we do
in the advocacy areas for which we are totally willing to play a
backseat role in a lot of different ways, and we aren’t driven by our
fundraising arm or our media arm. That’s been an issue between groups.

Rowe: You don’t need to play by your fundraising arm. You have an
endowment XE "funding/finance" .

Luke: Yes. Frankly, in all honesty, the size of the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
’s endowment, by the way, is primarily the result of grateful clients of
this animal hospital. If you analyzed the restrictions that are on the
endowment, it becomes really clear. We almost laugh about it. I can hear
from our folks in our development team saying, “We got two wills today.
One of them was for \$500 for one of your shelters, and the other was
for \$500,000 from somebody who gets rabies shots from Dr. Harpster
\[phonetic\] at Angell XE "Angell Memorial Animal Hospital" all the
time.” We tend to attract big money from people who are grateful
clients.

At any rate, the organization’s guts of its financial stuff comes from
our hands-on work in sheltering and law enforcement and hospital stuff.
The advocacy things—we do feel strongly about sort of our public
reputation and our reputation within places like the legislature in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" . For example, there’s a campaign going
on—if I can compare two campaigns, one of them being an anti-trapping
referendum that was broad scale and involved the entire animal community
in Massachusetts with a lot of help and assistance and leadership from
some national groups. It was a campaign that worked so well because it
was well-orchestrated where everyone walked in respecting differences
between organizations but all focusing on the same thing. And it also
happened to be done in a way that interacted with the media and the
legislature with, if you will, respect. We knew when the trapping
initiative petition was over that everybody may go home, but the next
day we’ll be in front of the legislature because we need to have a law
passed dealing with the issue of cruelty to animals or horse racing or
whatever other issue may be out there. So our long-term reputation is
important to us as an organization that has a certain—we want the
legislature to listen to us and we feel as though our reputation enables
the legislature to look for the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" when an animal issue comes up.

I really credit Wayne Pacelle XE "Pacelle, Wayne" in managing, in being
our partner, in the trapping initiative petition.

Rowe: Wayne Pacelle XE "Pacelle, Wayne" of the HSUS XE "Humane Society
of the United States (HSUS)" . Was he then with the HSUS?

Luke: Yes, he was. He was relatively—this was 1996. He was relatively
new. I knew Wayne actually when he was with the Fund for Animals XE
"Fund for Animals" . But what he did was basically orchestrated a
campaign that was honest, that was strong, that avoided too much, if you
will, of the alienation that can often happen with the legislature by
basically presenting a case that was clearly—the cruelty to animals
aspect of trapping had a factual basis that we could demonstrate. It was
an incredibly well-orchestrated and strategic campaign. Wayne XE
"Pacelle, Wayne" brought and taught us a lot about political
strategizing, about the importance of knowing before you get into a
campaign, doing your homework and understanding how the public feels and
what the opposition points will be raised against you. How do you argue
those and what issues resonate with the public? It was a professionally
strategic campaign. Because of that, actually, it won because it was so
well-orchestrated XE "trapping" \\r "trap2" .

There’s another one going on now that relates to greyhound racing and
banning greyhound racing in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" . The MSPCA
XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(MSPCA)" has a long history of opposing greyhound racing. We think it’s
an abomination. It had not been a strategic campaign. It, in fact, began
with some preliminary small polling that showed that the public is not
really engaged in this issue and doesn’t see it. In fact, the initial
polling—

Rowe: Doesn’t see the issue in that it doesn’t think it’s a problem?

Luke: Correct. In fact, the initial shot, for example, is that forty
percent of likely voters said that they would vote to ban greyhound
racing. We began the trapping campaign with seventy-five to eighty
percent of Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" citizens saying they would
vote for a petition to ban leg-hold traps in Massachusetts. This one
began in a bad way without a lot of, frankly, documentation for what’s
happening in our state. We can show a lot of pictures of disasters in
Florida XE "Florida" , but there are a lot of people who feel quite
emotional—and so do we, in reality—but are really emotionally involved
in greyhound racing and wanting to ban it. It hasn’t been a strategic
campaign at all. It’s been a campaign based on, “We need to get this out
of here.” The polling information, the structuring of the campaign, the
strategies involved in it—it just doesn’t exist.

There was a—the legislative hearing on it took place last week, and the
legislature was offended by the way this campaign was presented. The
legislature is asking questions like, “What proof do you have of a
single act of cruelty in Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" ?” The
campaign people said, “Well, we’ve got these pictures of things that are
happening in Missouri XE "Missouri" .” Frankly, the leadership of the
campaign didn’t even come to the legislature, feeling as though, “If
this was important to the legislature, they would have passed it long
ago. The hell with the legislature. We don’t need the legislature. This
is a people’s campaign.”

Rowe: When you say we, this wasn’t an MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" campaign.

Luke: No. We support the issue, but we don’t believe this is a good
strategy XE "racing" \\r "race1" .

Rowe: When you say you support the issue, what does that—

Luke: We don’t believe there is any place in this world for greyhound
racing XE "dogs" \\r "race1" .

Rowe: Right. But what do you mean by support? What does that mean? Does
that mean you provide financial support? Does that mean you put your
name on the petition?

Luke: No. Yes, we certainly have done that.

Rowe: And that, you feel, doesn’t affect your standing with the
legislature.

Luke: We believe that this is a bad strategy. We believe this is going
to lose, that the information that has been collected so far
demonstrates that this will not win.

Rowe: But the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" is not frightened now of appending its name
to a bunch of projects. In principle they would have to look at each
project, but in general it doesn’t have the—

Luke: We’re not afraid of coalitions at all. This one we don’t like in
part because we think it’s a bad strategy and it’s going to lose, and
does anybody want to contribute the million dollars to have this lose?
The other part of this is the campaign is not being run strategically.
What happened is people are saying, “The hell with the legislature.”

The reality is, even if this should somehow win—and we sort of hope it
wins but the information is that it doesn’t really stand a chance—but if
it wins, the next day the legislature can overturn it. Everyone will go
home again and we’ll still need to deal with legislature on it. So we
maintain a respectful relationship with the legislature, even when we
disagree with their government folks who deal with wildlife or their
government folks on the racing commission. So we’re not afraid to speak
up.

But the issue of—we do believe strongly that campaigns and things like
that need to be strategic. So our willingness to be involved with
campaigns and coalitions is still very strong. And we pick and choose
based on the issue, on its capability of success on a long-term basis,
and that’s part of our concern with this particular campaign.

The HSUS XE "Humane Society of the United States (HSUS)" is not going to
be involved in this campaign. We’ve become quite close, frankly, with
Wayne Pacelle XE "Pacelle, Wayne" and the HSUS XE "Humane Society of the
United States (HSUS)" and, like I said, learned a lot from them. Wayne
taught me a lot. And I like the model of studying and strategically
setting up the campaign. This one is not being strategically set up. The
HSUS XE "Humane Society of the United States (HSUS)" wants nothing to do
with it either.

Rowe: You’ve given me a good idea of the direction. You also mentioned
as a negative that veterinarians \[are\] not moving into animal
protection, which is an interesting statement. Could you develop on that
and what the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" is trying to do, because of course it’s in a
position of having veterinarians on staff.

Luke: I think that the general public has a great deal—the most
influential person on the public’s attitude towards animals, and it is
pretty clear—all you have to do is do any kind of market research—is the
veterinary community. People trust veterinarians. My experience with
veterinarians in my career, my professional career if you will, has been
that I have total confidence and belief that people get into the
veterinary field out of a basic love of animals, but that somehow along
the way—and I’m not quite sure how this seems to happen—the large
numbers of the veterinary community seem to disconnect with animal
welfare issues and start to become more focused on other issues, whether
it is even just the parts of the animal rather than the whole.

The veterinary community in general has not been a strong ally of even
the animal welfare community much less the animal rights community. At
the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (MSPCA)" , for example, we’re sort of two organizations, both of
whom are valid and important. But there’s very little interaction
between our veterinary community and the humane part of the MSPCA XE
"Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
, very little.

Rowe: Has there been any effort to change that?

Luke: Yes.

Rowe: By?

Luke: There have been efforts to do joint things together, to attack
projects together, whether it be the well-being of animals that are
treated in law enforcement cases. Obviously we get a lot of veterinary
care provided for us with cruelty cases. Sterilization services—I can’t
do those. I need the construction workers, if you will, in the
veterinary community to do that. But it’s never—I think the people,
particularly at a hospital like ours, at Angell XE "Angell Memorial
Animal Hospital" —this practices the highest level of veterinary care
that you can find. We tend to attract veterinarians who are very
enthusiastic about doing orthopedic surgery that involves hip
replacements or cardiac pacemakers or the latest advances of cancer care
therapy for dogs. Some of the issues like spaying and neutering—our
surgeons don’t like to do sterilization. They’d much rather be doing
complex—the kind of surgeons we attract are surgeons who are really
interested in other parts of the body, if you will. I think—

Rowe: The specialists, the highly—the technician.

Luke: Yes. This place is filled with specialists.

Rowe: Rather than the sort of common veterinarians XE "veterinary
medicine" \\r "vet2" .

Luke: Yes. The kind of thing that we see here as well—and I respect the
differences, but there are differences. If we have—if the
organization—let’s say somebody is throwing a luncheon for somebody and
there’s a luncheon being thrown by the Humane Services Division, there’s
going to be vegan food there. This isn’t a vegan organization. But the
kind of people who are attracted to our animal welfare part of us—we
don’t seek out and use one’s food or consumer habits as a criteria for
working here, but we have a tendency to be primarily if not vegan
certainly vegetarian in some definition or another, some
conscientiousness about the choices one makes. If one gets invited to a
medical luncheon, we often have nothing to eat because there’s no even
thought \[given\] to the issue that these folks might not eat hamburger.

In one sense the food issues within the animal community—and all of us
when we go home to our parents or whatever often face this kind of thing
of being perceived as not in the mainstream—that exists in our
organization. Perhaps the food issue is the most obvious of it because
it’s a personal choice issue. The MSPCA XE "Massachusetts Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)" , again, not a vegetarian
organization, believes in personal choice, but responsible conscientious
choices. We do welcome a variety of choices to be a part of us. Again,
we don’t promote veganism or vegetarianism, we promote conscientious
choices and think about what decisions you’re making. It just so happens
that probably eighty percent of the people who work in our area I would
use the word vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" \\r "veg" .

Rowe: But outside of this hospital, what about the veterinarians? Has
there been an attempt to—you had the Year of the Cat XE "Year of the
Cat" with the AVMA XE "American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)" .

Luke: Yes. Major accomplishment.

Rowe: I mean, surely now these days the people being attracted into the
veterinary profession have at least had thirty years of being aware of
the animal rights movement or twenty-five years of the animal rights
movement.

Luke: Just look at gender too.

Rowe: Well, gender. Walter XE "Kilroy, Walter" was talking about gender
as well.

Luke: There’s clearly a change. We have a veterinary school right down
the road, so we’re interacting with that school all the time. I
occasionally do lectures for the veterinary students, and I am on the
edge of the faculty of the master’s program at Tufts Veterinary School
XE "Tufts University Veterinary School" . There is clearly a difference
in the new veterinarians—much more animal welfare, animal rights
conscious.

The issue of—you’re going to talk to NEAVS \[New England
Anti-Vivisection Society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" \]. I mean XE "animal experimentation" , what a wonderful thing
that this institution NEAVS was able to work out with Tufts University
Medical School XE "Tufts University Medical School" the elimination of
the surgery labs—what a major accomplishment that this has been. That’s
happened because of not just NEAVS’ attention and willingness to talk
and dialogue but also a change in the students’ attitude toward these
things, just a more well-informed, more thoughtful student body, and
frankly a faculty for whom this issue is not—although it’s certainly
controversial at Tufts, it’s not unreal. It’s not totally out of the
question, which fifteen years ago it was out of the question.

That change in the veterinary profession is going to pay off in the long
run years down the road, but change doesn’t happen fast. Clearly, I
think if one looks at the makeup of veterinarians within agribusiness
and the veterinarians within the biomedical research field, you still
find a predominance of male veterinarians. I don’t mean to say that
gender is the only—what does the gender issue mean? I hear a lot of
people say, “Females are more nurturing and therefore they’re more
involved and engaged in issues related to suffering,” and maybe that’s
true and maybe it isn’t. But it certainly seems as though there have
been a lot more changes happening. I certainly have found it
discouraging that often veterinarians are not necessarily more partners
of us XE "veterinary medicine" \\r "vet3" .

Rowe: Animal rights/animal welfare: Do you think that’s a false
distinction?

Luke: Yes. I hate it.

Rowe: Because?

Luke: It forces people into camps. The public’s understanding of the
phrase “animal rights,” I think is too frequently associated with—

Rowe: Paint splattering?

Luke: Yes. Disrespectful violence, blowing up of buildings. It’s reached
the point in time, I think, where if one gets known as an animal rights
activist, the label for some people carries such negative—in the outside
world is so negative. I don’t think that there are two camps either.

Rowe: Finally, overly stressed, working too hard: I fancy that that’s
quite a common occurrence in the animal welfare movement—people who are
sensitive by nature working in a field that is very, very distressing
and seems to be never-ending in the things that one is being required to
do. It’s an important discussion that I think nobody really talks
about—preventing activist burnout, preventing that kind of thing. What
does the animal welfare—what is the dirty little secret that the animal
welfare community needs to grab a hold of? What needs to be done to stop
this kind of running-through of activists, the very fact that nobody has
survived in a shelter for more than twenty-five years?

Luke: No one ever makes that. I can’t help but think that one has to
somehow come to grips with how do you balance passion and wanting to
help with limited time and energy. The hardest thing in the world to do
is to sometimes do, whatever that time is, “I’m going to go home.” Yet
there’s still going to be a need. There’s still problems. There’s huge
problems and animals that are suffering that—one can feel as though I’m
the only savior, I’m the only one who can do this. I think all of us who
do this in a passionate way feel as though as there’s never an end of
the problems and that I’ve got to be one of those who is always engaged
in it. The line between work and life doesn’t exist.

In one sense, again, I’m sort of proud of my major accomplishment is
that the people that I have working for us now are so different than
what they used to be, and yet their term of employment is probably less.
If there is anything I can do as a leader with our own staff is to
convince them that taking care of their own health and well-being is a
way to actually in the long-run help animals. This is not a one-year
thing and then animal suffering is over. Part of it has to do with the
most difficult thing in the world, which is when to stop and how to take
a rest and when to stay home when you’re sick and what the value is of a
weekend and what the value is of a relationship with someone who doesn’t
just do animals and environmental stuff. I think we fry out our partners
in this life. Animal rights and animal welfare is just—the bodies, the
dead bodies of partners and lovers that we leave on the side of the road
because \[we\] ignored them because we cared too much about whatever is
a problem. I think that those are difficult.

I also think it’s important to share things with the community. We can’t
be the only ones that own animal problems.

Rowe: Spread the burden.

Luke: Yes. And the more we can—in the sheltering community there has
always been the belief that I am the only one that can help this stray
cat. In fact, you find a stray cat, I want you to bring it to me. I
don’t want you to keep it or find a home for it. Don’t put an ad in the
paper. Bring it to me. I’ll find a home for it. That’s crazy. That’s
arrogant. That’s absorbing too much, and it’s not letting the community
share the problem. Now, that’s a companion animal issue but also a local
wildlife issue. So I think we need to bring more people into the
fold—not just volunteers and staff—but more of the rest of the world.
Then we need to find a way of recognizing where our limits are and
taking a breath XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community"
\\r "rights4" .

\[End of Session\].

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

INDEX \\h " " \\c "1" \\e " "

American Humane Association (AHA) 27

American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) 27

American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) 27, 33

Angell Memorial Animal Hospital 10, 17, 29, 32

animal experimentation and testing 5–7, 33

Animal Liberation 5

animal rights movement/animal protection community 7, 12–13, 28–29,
34–35

animal shelters 10–12, 13–14, 17–18, 20–22

Animals \[magazine\] 10

Arizona 6

Arluke, Arnold 24

Armstrong, Martha 13, 15, 16

California

Los Angeles 10

campaigning/lobbying 25–31

cats 25–28

children and animals 24–25

chipmunks 4

civil disobedience 18–19

Cummings, Robert 10, 16

Dane County (Wisconsin) Humane Society 9

demonstrations and protests 12

District Attorneys Association 25

dogs 1–2

Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 25

Florida 30

Fund for Animals 30

funding/finance 12–13, 14–16, 28, 29

Game Mammals \[textbook\] 3

greyhound racing 30–31

Harlow, Harry 5–7

Harvard University 17

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 9, 10, 27, 30, 31

hunting 4–5

Illinois

Chicago 1

Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 27

Judicial Training Council 25

Kilroy, Walter 9, 10, 12, 13, 16, 33

law and legislation 18–19, 22–24, 25

Leopold, Aldo 3, 5

Life \[magazine\] 1

Lucky \[dog\] 2

managing an organization 10-17, 20-22

Massachusetts 12, 13, 19, 23, 25, 29, 30

Boston 9, 14, 15, 17, 21

Brockton 17

Martha’s Vineyard 14, 17

Methuen 17, 20–22, 26

Nantucket 17

Springfield 17

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)
8–33

media 20

Missouri 30

Mobilization for Animals 12, 15

New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS) 33

New England Police Information Network 25

New Hampshire 20

New York

New York City 1, 10, 24, 28

Northeastern University 23–25

overpopulation of animals 13, 20

Pacelle, Wayne 29–31

primates 5–7

psychological aspects 4, 6-9, 23-25, 34-35

Procter & Gamble 29

public relations/outreach 20, 21, 27–28

Revlon 28

Sand County Almanac, and Sketches Here and There, A 5

Savesky, Kathy 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16

Singer, Peter 5, 6

skunks 4, 5

spaying and neutering 26

Spira, Henry 28, 29

Sports Illustrated 1

Suomi, Stephen 6–8

trapping 3–4, 29–30

Tufts University Medical School 33

Tufts University Veterinary School 33

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 28

University of Wisconsin 3, 5, 6

vegetarianism 32–33

veterinary medicine 16–17, 27, 28, 31–32, 33–34

violence toward animals and humans 22-25

wildlife (in general) 1–5

wildlife management 3, 5

Wisconsin 3, 5, 6, 9–11, 13, 22

Lacrosse 6

Madison 5, 6, 8, 9

women and animals 33

World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) 22

Year of the Cat 26–28, 33
