---
---

This edited transcript is the product of tape-recorded interviews
conducted by Kenneth J. Shapiro with F. Barbara Orlans in Bethesda,
Maryland, on December 20, 2001 and January 16, 2002, for the non-profit
group Recording Animal Advocacy

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 – December 20, 2001

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

Childhood experience of animals: family was always fond of animals –
Father was strict; mother was often ill and died when FBO was 11; got on
very well with stepmother – Religion was important in teenage years –
Good relationship with three sisters – Becoming a vegetarian at age 8
and receiving special vegetarian ration during the war – College years:
wonderful social life; living at home and lack of independence; losing
Christian faith because of dislike of Church’s missionary and conversion
work – Reflections on animal experimentation while studying physiology
and anatomy in college: not bothered by it because students were
prepared emotionally and practically – Living and working in London in
the 1950s: loved London and had a “terrific social life”; interested in
politics and books; did routine diagnostic analyses work in a laboratory
at the university hospital.

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

More on enjoying living in London – Ph.D research involved doing animal
experiments, but it was not an issue – Went to America to work because
it was “fun”; being offered many jobs; left the first job because
Baltimore was ugly and unsafe; worked on chemical pharmacological
research in the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for a few years –
Shocked by the way laboratory animals were kept there and by the lack of
regulations and training of researchers in the humane treatment of
animals, especially compared to the situation in England – Becoming
interested in animal welfare legislation in the late 1950s through
Christine Stevens and joining her lobbying efforts; the pro-animal
research stance of the biomedical community and NIH; excellent
impressions of Stevens and her work – Appalled by and dedication to
changing the horrific cruelty to animals used in science fair projects
of high school students – Various organizations (e.g. National Society
for Medical Research) encouraging these projects.

\[Tape 2 Side A\] . . . . .

Deeply troubled by the experiment on sparrows of a Westinghouse Science
Talent Search finalist; Stevens’ supplying information to newspaper
reporter leading to the end of harming animals in Westinghouse contests
– Some improvements to science fairs have been made but problems still
exist – Attitudes of high school biology teachers towards animals not
very good – Making a commitment to work on animal welfare in the 1960s;
involvement with feminist and civil rights issues.

Session 2 – January 16, 2002

\[Tape 3, Side A\] . . . . .

Scientists Center for Animal Welfare (SCAW): starting the organization
in late 1970s; NSMR attacking the organization; FBO doing all the work
without pay; mission of SCAW; success of conferences in the 1980s; great
difficulties in finding scientists to be board members because they
wanted to retain the status quo; advocating for Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC); obtaining grants from foundations and
leaving NIH to work for SCAW full-time; trouble with other board members
as witnessed in their rejection of FBO’s article on science fairs; the
way SCAW’s board worked; the nature of the differences in opinions and
strategies between FBO and other board members, with the latter
regarding FBO as too critical and outspoken on animal experimentation;
did not choose the right board members; fighting intensified with
revision of SCAW’s by-laws and board members’ term limits issue,
eventually leading to the firing of FBO in 1987; position of SCAW now
opposite of FBO’s initial intentions; firing has been “an enormous blow”
financially and as powerful as “the death of a baby”.

\[Tape 3, Side B\] . . . . .

The concept of “pain scale”; countries adopting this concept; the lack
of support for it in the U.S. biomedical community – Writing In the Name
of Science; disappointment with having to water down the book’s
pro-animal stance because of publisher’s request – Beginning of
association with the Kennedy Center for Ethics and the philosophers
there – Collaborating with others on The Human Use of Animals; using
case studies approach; impact of the book – Organizing a dozen or so
conferences at universities in the 1990s.

\[Tape 4, Side A\] . . . . .

Very glad about involvement with the animal cause over the decades;
tremendous influence from Stevens; laboratory raids by the Animal
Liberation Front (ALF) and strategies of People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PETA) in the 1980s were effective at the time –
Views on the rights and moral status of animals – Scientists and other
individuals in different countries who are doing good work on animal
experimentation issues – Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) has
grown “too fat” – Improvement in public attitudes and contributions made
by scientists to a better understanding of animals – Important issues in
the near future: inclusion of rats, mice, birds in Animal Welfare Act;
improving review process; training scientists and investigators who use
animals; focusing on particular experimental procedures; abolishing use
of chimpanzees in research.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

December 20, 2001

Bethesda, Maryland – home of Barbara Orlans

Session of 1-3/4 hour

January 16, 2002

Bethesda, Maryland – home of Barbara Orlans

Session of 2-1/4 hours

Interviewer:

Kenneth J. Shapiro (Vice President, Recording Animal Advocacy,
co-founder and Executive Director, Psychologists for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Barbara Orlans. Carmen Lee checked
the edited transcript, and prepared the index and introductory material
except the “Biographical sketch” which was provided by Orlans.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Barbara Orlans was brought up in England and came to the United States
in 1956 after obtaining a Ph.D. in physiology from London University.
She conducted animal research in heart disease and later was an
administrator at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda,
Maryland. At NIH, her concern for animals developed to the point of
becoming an activist. In 1979 she left NIH to establish a nonprofit
educational organization, the Scientists Center for Animal Welfare, of
which was found president and director. Major reform efforts have been
directed at the use of animals in education, the recognition and
assessment of animal pain, and strengthening the reduction, refinement,
and replacement of animal experiments. In 1989 she joined the faculty of
the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown University, Washington,
DC, a position she holds in 2002. Recent books include: In the Name of
Science: Issues in Responsible Animal Experimentation (1993) and The
Human Use of Animals: Case Studies in Ethical Choice (1998), both
published by Oxford University Press.

\[The above biography was provided by Barbara Orlans\]

F. Barbara Orlans

Session \#1

December 20, 2001

Bethesda, Maryland

Kenneth J. Shapiro, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Shapiro: We are in Bethesda, Maryland at the home of Barbara Orlans. My
name is Ken Shapiro, and we will be meeting together for four or five
hours. This is our first session. Perhaps for the record it should be
known that Barbara and I are colleagues. In fact, Barbara served on the
board of directors of Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of Animals
\[PsyETA\] for a number of years, and we are friends. With that, let’s
begin.

As we discussed, we can do this chronologically and try to get a sense
of your life and particularly with themes relating to the animal issue.
Why don’t you take us from the beginning?

Orlans: All right. I was born in 1928 in Birmingham, England and brought
up in one of the suburbs there called Moseley. I had three siblings —
three elder sisters — and my parents. We lived there for many years,
indeed, right up until the time I left to go to London to do post B.Sc.
work.

We had plenty of animals in the house — a dog, always a dog and always a
cat. My mother was terribly fond of guinea pigs, so we used to keep
guinea pigs and let them loose. We had a big walled garden, and it was
lots of fun for us children to have to catch the guinea pig at the end
of the day to put him back in his box. We had a nice big hayloft where
we not only played but we had the guinea pig up there as well. There was
one called Willy that Mother used to have sit up in her hand. I remember
Willy very clearly. The dogs, of course, were very significant. I’ve
always absolutely loved dogs.

You know, it was just an ordinary English home life. The British culture
where you were always going to be very fond of animals was just taken
for granted. So there was nothing out of the ordinary in terms of taking
particular interest in animals really right up until the early 60s, as
will be revealed.

Shapiro: So your feeling is that your interest in animals was given to
you within the family context. It just was natural; it was just there.

Orlans: It was just there.

Shapiro: Was there any distinction among you in terms of interest in
animals — your mother \[Flora Hughes\], your father \[Christopher
Hughes\], your sibs?

Orlans: I don’t think so. We all loved all the animals. We all had very
much joint responsibility for them. One dog \[a mixed terrier\] in
particular who died when I was at university, I was particularly
responsible for. I was the last one left in the house by that time being
the youngest. It was my job to look after Bobby right up until his
death. He was about sixteen years of age at that time, which was all
very traumatic and the sort of situation where you cry for days and days
afterwards.

Shapiro: Did you have any special attachment besides Bobby? Were you
especially attached to any of the animals, or it was just one big
family?

Orlans: Bobby was an important dog. Then when I went to Birmingham
University to study physiology and anatomy — straight out of high
school, of course — I had my own dog then. Bobby died and I got a
springer spaniel. He was my own dog at that point, such as the other
animals hadn’t been because they were family animals. But I had to leave
Topper behind when I went to work in London after I finished my first
degree. Then my parents looked after him until he died. But that was the
only one I had specially to myself. I took him to obedience class and
had a special concern for him.

Shapiro: Do you want to describe just a bit more your relationship with
the guinea pig and the dogs? Were they lap dogs? Were they hunting dogs?

Orlans: No. They were all mixed breed animals. I don’t remember where we
got them from. I think we just got these animals from friends or kennels
in a very casual way. There weren’t nasty kennels like some of them
nowadays. We spent a lot of time with the animals.

Shapiro: In the house — the dogs were in the house?

Orlans: Yes, of course. Oh, yes. And terrific games in the garden. Bobby
was particularly important, because throughout all my life he was always
nearly the same age as myself. Bobby was a big thing. You know, we all
used to play with him a lot. We had a marvelous game where we had a bit
of old rope with a knot at each end, and he would hold onto one end and
the person would hold on the other. We’d swing him round; his teeth were
so strong. \[Laughter\]. He absolutely adored it. We had a nice big
garden so you could run and run around with balls and all sorts of
games. Of course, we used to go on many walks and hikes. Bobby always
got a lot of exercise and a terrific amount of attention.

Shapiro: Great. You felt very bad when you lost him.

Orlans: Terrible.

Shapiro: How was that for you?

Orlans: I was the only one left at home at that time. He started getting
a big abscess on his back. He was obviously getting very ancient by that
time and ailing. The veterinarian did whatever he could, but when the
decision point came, I had to take him to be euthanized. That was the
most terrible walk I’ve ever had in my life. I knew I had to do it.

Shapiro: It was your decision really at that point?

Orlans: Yes, it really was. I mean, obviously there was concurrence with
my parents, but I was the major player in that scene. I think we all
wept for several days after. Certainly my mother did — my stepmother
\[Hilda Lindsey Hughes\], that was. My birth mother had died and my
father remarried.

Shapiro: Was this a rural setting or a city setting?

Orlans: Suburban. We lived about ten or twelve miles out of the city of
Birmingham — a nasty, industrial town that I couldn’t wait to leave. But
my father had a factory there. In his twenties he decided to go off on
his own to have a factory for making plastic Bakelite goods. We had a
good living. We had a resident maid. It was all very pleasant. Sundays
were important because we used to go out as a family in the car to the
Lickey Hills, which is just about ten or fifteen miles away from our
house. We’d go for walks and the dog would go crazy just racing around
having a good time.

I do remember one specific instant when I was about seven. My mother was
— this was with my real mother, my birth mother, who died when I was
eleven. My mother was ill for years prior to that with asthma and
depression. My mother and I went to the Lickey Hills to stay in a little
cottage there for a holiday. The dog had only ever gone there in the
car. Father took us and dropped us off one day and went back home with
the dog.

The next morning we were having breakfast. Somebody was looking after us
and preparing meals for us. The woman of the house came and said, “Oh,
there’s a bedraggled dog at the door, and he won’t go away.” So we went
out to see what it was all about, and there was Bobby, absolutely
covered in mud and as tired as anything. How he ever managed to find his
way where he had only gone by car this considerable distance —

Shapiro: Ten miles or so.

Orlans: Yes. Ten or fifteen miles. It was just unbelievable. Of course,
we washed him, cleaned him up, fed him and so on. Of course, he stayed
with us for the rest of the week. \[Laughter\].

Shapiro: I guess he wanted his vacation.

Orlans: That was the very morning after we had gone. He didn’t want to
us to be there by ourselves. It was an incredible experience really.

Shapiro: He was coming, you think, to see you and Mother as
distinguished from Father?

Orlans: Yes, because we would be home all day, you know. Father was off
at the factory all day long. Bobby was going to have more fun with us
obviously. And he loved the Lickey Hills. That story went down in family
history, as you can imagine.

Shapiro: I can imagine, yes, a real animal story. Tell me a little about
your relationship with your mother. She was sickly?

Orlans: My mother — yes. She was a very beautiful woman, very
accomplished, very artistic. She played the piano wonderfully. All of us
children took piano lessons. Father had a good voice. He used to sing
ballads. It was usually Thursday evening that we would get together with
a friend of ours called Nicholas who sang in the church choir. We would
have musical evenings. All of us girls could play and do party pieces
and so on. Nicholas had a good voice. He had also served in the First
World War, and so he knew all the army songs. He taught all of these to
us, which was terrific. \[Laughter\]. We all knew the lyrics to the war
songs very, very well indeed.

My father was not artistic in the least. He was absolutely, totally
engaged in his factory and dealing with all those issues. He was a
strict person. We weren’t to play the piano when he was around because
it disturbed him. We had to be silent when he came back in the evening,
very quiet. We couldn’t do all the hijinks. The games were out.

Sundays — we were a religious family, and we went up to the Baptist
church — not Baptist in the American style but English Baptist with
adult baptism, which I went through with one of my sisters when I was
about sixteen — a very meaningful experience for me. It was at my
mother’s behest that all of us children went to church every Sunday
morning. My father hardly ever went. Also we children went to Sunday
School in the afternoon. We weren’t allowed to play cards on a Sunday,
various restrictions like that. But we were a happy family. I think when
you’ve got three siblings, you can’t help but have a very, very good
time. \[Laughter\].

Shapiro: Were you religious yourself personally, believing in God, a
believer?

Orlans: Yes, absolutely.

Shapiro: So you weren’t dragged kicking and screaming.

Orlans: Not at all, no. I think by the time I went in for this adult
baptism with my elder sister Peggy, both of us arrived there at the same
time, taking it very seriously. The other two sisters never went in for
adult baptism, and the church was never particularly important to either
of them. But I did missionary — what was called missionary work in
Birmingham in the slums. This was through a church youth group that I
belonged to. The youth group was a very active group. We’d meet once a
week on Monday evenings, played badminton, socialized, and so on. \[Tape
interruption\]. This was an important social group for me. We studied
other religions. We were a serious bunch of teenagers. We all took our
religion very seriously. From the church we ran this mission in the
slums of Birmingham. I would do one evening a week — well, stayed after
school. It was merely taking these poverty-stricken kiddies off the
street to try to give them something to do. I don’t think we went in for
much sort of pushing of religion at all. It was basically just providing
some recreational activities for these children. That was important to
me.

It wasn’t until I got to university — I went to Birmingham University,
so I was resident at home, much against my wishes. I had all sorts of
highfalutin notions to go to Oxford, but my father wouldn’t — didn’t
want me to do that.

Shapiro: Because of leaving home situation?

Orlans: I think financially, a bit of both. My mother was dead by then.
This is not very chronological, but my mother died when I was eleven. So
all these teenage years, we were either by ourselves or, within I don’t
remember how many years, my father married my mother’s best friend. We
used to call her Auntie Hilda. But within a matter of a year or two, we
started calling her Mother at my father’s request. She became
tremendously important to all of us.

Shapiro: There were a number of years between the marriages?

Orlans: I don’t remember how long.

Shapiro: I was just wondering whether those teenage years you were
without a mother.

Orlans: No, I don’t think it was all that long, maybe two or three
years. I remember my father going after somebody else, and we children
managed to absolutely kibosh that because we hated this woman.
\[Laughter\]. But then when he started going out with Auntie Hilda, this
was all fine. We all loved her dearly. By the time, as the years went
by, in fact, we came to love my stepmother much more than my father, who
was an incredibly difficult man — very, very autocratic, very strict,
had no idea what to do with me, who was somewhat rebellious. I had my
own mind what I wanted to do.

Shapiro: More so than the three older?

Orlans: Yes, absolutely. I was much more difficult. \[Laughter\]. I used
to want to go off to symphony concerts: Thursday evenings and Sunday
afternoon I went to the Birmingham symphony. They had these two programs
a week. But my father didn’t have a clue how to treat me. This was
during the years, I guess, when he was by himself. But he failed in some
way with each of us, of us going through periods of very deep hatred, I
think.

Shapiro: Hatred?

Orlans: Hatred for me against my father.

Shapiro: Of you against your father.

Orlans: Absolutely. He would make me leave the symphony concert early in
order to get home for my nine-thirty curfew. I felt very rebellious
about that. I thought it was perfectly stupid. But anyhow, that was the
way it was. He would lock me out of the house — and this was all
terribly traumatic — if I was one minute late. They were very troubling
years for me.

Shapiro: You lost your mother when you were eleven, and then your father
was very difficult in your teenage years, so those combined together.
Was the loss of your mother very difficult for the family?

Orlans: I hadn’t seen her for several years before she died. She had
been away in various health centers, all sorts of natural food fad type
of things. You know, if you lived on asparagus, this was going to get
rid of your asthma and so on. But, indeed, she was a sick woman. I
remember driving around with her in her car. She used to have an oxygen
cylinder between the two bucket seats. I can remember on many occasion
us having to pull to the side of the road for her to use the equipment
to get her breath back again. I don’t have very strong recollections of
her, because I think from the age of about eight on she wasn’t there.
She was out of the house in various institutions and these therapy
places. I have a very vague memory of them.

Shapiro: Can you tell us a little bit about your place with the other
three sibs, out of that set of relationships. You said you were a little
bit more on the rebellious side. What else? Were you close to them?

Orlans: Well, in adulthood I think I have loving relationships with all
three of them. With Peggy, my oldest sister, I guess there was the
closest kinship in terms of common interests, of being interested in
books, music, and so on. However, the pairing of us while we were
children was that the two eldest, Peggy and Sylvia, and then Gwennie and
myself. The relationship with Gwennie has been incredibly close. Gwennie
remains to this day very dear and a very important part of my life.

Shapiro: You mentioned books. Was the family intellectual or no?

Orlans: No. My father didn’t even know what I was studying when I was at
university. I majored in physiology and I took a minor in anatomy. I
remember when a visitor came to the house and asked Father what I was
doing. Father said I was studying physics. He was sort of close but he
didn’t quite make it.

Shapiro: They sound alike, physics and physiology.

Orlans: Yes. I was the only one out of the four of us who went to
college. My eldest sister bears a grudge against Father and perhaps me
because she never went to college, but she never asked. I think if she
had — if the other sisters had asked, it would have been fine. But it
was not an intellectual family at all.

Shapiro: What about politics? Was that part of the family atmosphere,
family talk?

Orlans: Not much.

Shapiro: So religion was a primary organizing —

Orlans: Not really, no. Just only for my mother’s side. The music
evenings were important. But there wasn’t too much emphasis on anything
really in particular.

Shapiro: What about vegetarianism when you were a child? Was there any
talk of that?

Orlans: Yes. I’m glad you mentioned that, because I had — I think I was
about eight or so when I began to be a vegetarian. That was because my
sister Gwennie became a vegetarian. We decided on it mutually. I can’t
really reconstruct why we thought it was terribly important, but it was.
I think we just had a sort of yuck feeling against meat. All the rest of
the family were meat-eaters. Sunday lunch when we came home from church
on Sundays, it was always the big meal — roast beef and what have you.

But we decided we would cut our own path on this. I was about ten or
eleven when the Second World War broke out. Gwennie and I both
registered as vegetarians for food rationing, which meant that we got
two eggs a month instead of one for meat eaters. We got a bit of extra
butter. The ration was, I think, one ounce of butter and two ounces of
margarine. I don’t remember the exact figures, but we’d get maybe two
ounces of butter and three ounces of margarine, something like that. We
had to have special ration books. Of course, food was exceedingly
difficult during that period.

Shapiro: So you can’t reconstruct or even guess why the two of you
turned to that?

Orlans: I think it was really just an aversion to the blood.

Shapiro: It was a sort of yuck.

Orlans: I really don’t think we were terribly concerned about the caging
of the animals or their confinement or even the killing. There weren’t
any horror stories in those days. There wasn’t factory farming. We’d
visit farms.

In fact, we had a caravan. What do you call them? A trailer, I think,
you call them. We had a trailer all during our childhood. My father
bought an old bus, a big bus. He converted it into a lovely caravan; he
was very practical. It was just by the river outside Stratford-on-Avon.
We all had bicycles down there so that we could bicycle into the
Stratford theater on Saturday nights. We spent all of our weekends there
in the summer. There was a lot of swimming. We were right at the river.
We were on a farm. You know, cattle were there and sheep and geese. But
I don’t think we were particularly concerned about \[them\]. But I don’t
think Gwennie and I particularly cared about these issues.

Shapiro: Did you make any distinction in your own mind between the dog
and the guinea pig on the one hand and the farm animals on the other?
Did you feel sympathetic to all?

Orlans: No. They were all nice creatures. We enjoyed them all. We
enjoyed the cows. Bobby used to be a great swimmer. We had a diving
board, and Bobby would dive off the edge. It was great. We had great
weekends.

Shapiro: It sounds idyllic.

Orlans: It was good.

Shapiro: You stayed with vegetarianism?

Orlans: Yes, absolutely. I don’t think that I was all that strict with
myself. I first came to this country in ’56 straight after getting my
Ph.D.; I came here for a year initially. Well, that was my intent. But I
was eating chicken on occasion then. Friends tell me that when I’d go to
dinner, I’d say it would be all right to serve chicken. But by now, of
course, I’ve straightened up. \[Laughter\]. I don’t remember quite the
timing of all of this, but certainly I soon abandoned chicken. I don’t
really care for eating fish at all now.

Shapiro: Anything else in the childhood period before we move to college
time that you want to bring up that I haven’t thought of or you haven’t
thought of?

Orlans: I don’t think so. I think we’ve got a bit of a picture of that.

Shapiro: Yes, good. So you were a bit bookish compared to the other
siblings at least. You indicate an interest in going to college, and off
you went. What were you interested in at college? Was it physiology and
anatomy right away?

Orlans: I didn’t set my sights very high. I went to quite a good school
but not the best school in Birmingham. I was always top of the class in
this sort of second level school. I certainly had aspirations for a good
career, but they weren’t very ambitious. I thought if I were a
pharmacist or something like that, that would do fine. I certainly
wanted to get some college education. I wouldn’t describe myself as
bookish. I didn’t really read any books at that time. \[Laughter\]. And
I wasn’t a very good student either. College was a good social period.

Shapiro: You said you were top of the class but —

Orlans: Well, yes, at high school. Yes, I worked — I liked my position
there in high school. But when I got to college, of course it was an
eye-opener when you realize how bright other people are and where your
place really is. So I had a terrific social life, dances every Saturday
night and lots of liar dice. What were the other games we played?

Shapiro: Liar dice?

Orlans: Yes. It’s a sort of gambling game. It’s poker. Yes, we used to
play poker a lot. A great group of friends, terrific. You’d study a bit
before the exams but not too much concentration on that, just enough to
get through.

Shapiro: You lived at home.

Orlans: I lived at home. I resented the lack of independence. I wanted
to be away from home. I would have loved to have gone away to college.
It was during that period, as a matter of fact, which may be a
correction of what I said before, that my father kept insisting that I
be home at nine-thirty. That was the whole pattern.

Shapiro: At college you had to be home.

Orlans: Yes. Up until the age of twenty-one when I graduated. He was
exceedingly strict. He didn’t have — as I said before, he did not know
what I was about at all, and I did not understand him.

Shapiro: In the adolescent years and later years also?

Orlans: During college years. We were totally out of tune with each
other. He was married to my stepmother by that time, who was a great
peacemaker and a terrific help to all of us. I had the most friction
with my father of all us children, but she was just wonderful.

Anyhow, it was during those college years that I lost my Christian
faith. I began to question very much. In those days there was an awful
lot of missionary work in Africa that we were always hearing about.
You’ve got to go and save all these people who didn’t have the same
beliefs as yourself. So they were the sinners and they weren’t going to
go to heaven and all that. I couldn’t stomach that. I rebelled against
it very much. So I talked it over with a lot of people.

Shapiro: Exactly what is it that you’re rebelling against there?

Orlans: The missionary work. I didn’t want all the efforts to go and
convert people to Christianity as if this was the one and only religion.
That was a terribly important point for me.

Shapiro: The exclusivity of it.

Orlans: Yes, absolutely. The Christian church — at least the Baptist
church where I was — was full of it at the time. All the time you were
collecting money, saving it, sending money over for African hospitals
and so on, but most particularly thrusting Christianity down their
throats. So after really a lot of thought, I was still doing this slum
work in Birmingham during that period, but I came to the point where I
gave it all up and decided that I really didn’t believe in God. I
certainly didn’t want to go around thinking that there was only one
religion.

So by the time I graduated, I was anxious to get out of Birmingham. It’s
not a very nice city anyhow, although it’s got a respectable theater and
a good symphony orchestra. My first job was to work at the London
Hospital in the East End of London, a great place, a very rich community
out there with all the cockneys and Petticoat Lane and the Elephant Man
who was looked after in the London Hospital. I had a job as a
biochemist.

Shapiro: Excuse me. Are you leaving college now?

Orlans: I’m leaving college. I’ve graduated at twenty-one.

Shapiro: I’m going to take you back to college just for a moment. In the
British system you’re going to college at what age?

Orlans: Eighteen.

Shapiro: And you’re staying four years?

Orlans: Three. \[I was\] twenty-one.

Shapiro: And during that time you’re majoring in —

Orlans: Physiology and anatomy.

Shapiro: Okay, at that time. And that means you are more or less
exclusively taking those courses, or was it a broad education?

Orlans: No, it wasn’t very broad. In the first year you’re made to do
some physical education, so I did fencing. Then I had to take some
humanities, so I took some philosophy. That was about the extent of it.

Shapiro: Can you tell us what was your interest that drew you to
physiology and anatomy?

Orlans: I don’t know. \[Laughter\]. It was a good course. They were very
good classes. What we did was an experiment at the time. The physiology
majors, of whom there were about six or eight of us, we did pre-clinical
medicine actually. We were joint classes with the med students. Of
course, it’s a different setup for medical studies in England because
they go on a six-year course for medicine there. So the medical students
do two years — two or three years, I don’t remember which — of
pre-clinical work. It was that that we went in, so we did all the
standard physiology classes, experimentation, which included some
observations of cat experiments on the nervous system and so on, and
some isolated tissue experimentation. I did anatomy, which was human
anatomy. We were working with the med students with the human cadavers.

Shapiro: I just want to ask you while you were transitioning there, were
you having any feelings or thoughts or examination of the involvement
with animals in the laboratory at that time?

Orlans: No.

Shapiro: It was there, but you weren’t seeing it as an issue?

Orlans: No. It was not until the final year, the third year, of classes
that we had any observations of any animal experiments. We did a lot of
— I’m forgetting the term. But you’d cut away part of the brain of the
cat so that none of its spinal cord was working. I can’t even remember
the name of it now. Anyhow, this was a sort of standard technique.

Shapiro: Decorticate?

Orlans: Decorticate, thank you. The professor would do the experiment;
we would just observe. But I can only remember doing isolated tissue
stuff. I don’t remember doing any one-on-one, me and one live animal,
during that period.

I do remember very clearly that we had a whole semester course on what
were the legal situations for animal welfare of laboratory animals. It
was quite an intensive course. We were well prepared, just as we were
well prepared for doing that anatomy on the human body where you’ve
really got to prep the students to have a decent attitude, especially
among med students. I did hold a license during the final year of my
bachelor’s degree for animal experimentation, as required under the
British law.

Shapiro: On animals.

Orlans: Yes.

Shapiro: Which was related to the Animal Welfare Act of 18 what?

Orlans: That was the 1876 act.\[1\] As potential licensees, we were
visited by a Home Office inspector to approve whatever modest project
you had, but it was nothing invasive to the animal that we ever did. If
any animal had to be anesthetized or euthanized, it was always the
professor or the senior technician who would do it. We didn’t do
anything like that. But the course and the investigator licensing laid a
groundwork which I drew on later when I was in the United States. We
were well versed before we were allowed to see an animal, let alone
touch an animal, on humane attitudes, anesthetic methods, euthanasia
methods and so on, and what were the provisions of the law. It was
terribly important. In the US to this day, no such courses are required
before conducting animal experiments.

Shapiro: From your current perspective looking back, comparatively would
you say that — how would you compare the conditions then in terms of
preparation of the student in terms of the treatment of the animal to
now?

Orlans: Black and white.

Shapiro: And which is which?

Orlans: \[Laughter\]. In England there really was always an emphasis on
having respect for the animal, building on what I would call British
culture of sympathy towards animals and not wanting to harm them and
having a justification for whatever you did to them, a strong
justification, and observing laws and regulations and being well
prepared both in a practical sense, but perhaps as importantly, in an
emotional sense of what you do. It was that significant difference, of
course, that was the leading issue that drew me into any animal activist
work in the United States. I really think that if I had stayed in
England I wouldn’t have gone into animal activism. There was no
particular reason. I didn’t see anything particularly horrendous or that
aggravated me at all. It seemed to be well controlled and what I
considered to be good laws.

Shapiro: So there was no traumatic moment or special moment when you
were initiated into dissection? It just seemed to unfold, with good
preparation, naturally?

Orlans: Yes. I don’t even remember doing dissection. It was nothing like
that.

Shapiro: Okay. You were telling me about your first job. You moved from
Birmingham to London.

Orlans: Great. I had a bed-sitting room. \[Laughter\]. \[I lived on\]
Collinswood Road in Earl’s Court, which is where everybody starts off in
London. It’s a whole series of modest houses separated into single-room
bed-sitters where you have a gas ring to do your cooking, just one
burner, and a gas fire, which you had to put shillings into, so you were
always collecting shillings. That was my life. I’d go down, take the
Underground, and go out to the East End to go to the hospital each day.
In fact, it was a six-day workweek — six-day alternating with five-day
in those days.

I was very happy. I was deliriously happy that I was free from my
father. It was a whole new life, a whole sense of liberation. I didn’t
have to get home at nine-thirty. So for months I used to go out at
nine-thirty every night. I mean, it was freedom. I just walked the
streets at nine-thirty for half an hour, an hour. It was marvelous. I
started making great friends and a whole international set. I quickly
got involved with Pakistanis, several Egyptians, several Americans, who
remain terribly important in my life. It was a terrific period.

Shapiro: What was the work you were doing?

Orlans: It was very humble work. It was in the bio-chem lab doing the
analyses of blood, urine, what have you for various diagnostic tests.

Shapiro: Clinical not research.

Orlans: No, it was not research at all. It was just straightforward
diagnostic analyses. We had to go round in the mornings to do the
blood-taking of the patients in the hospital. In those days the
equipment was quite crude. We had a series of different calibers of
needles that we would sterilize. Of course, it was none of the
disposable stuff at the time. And some of us — there were two or three
of us who were involved in this — became quite good at doing this. The
chief of the laboratory where I worked, an Indian fellow, was absolutely
dreadful. He was choosing whopping big needles, and the patients would
scream because he was so brutal with them. Our life project was to stop
any patients getting near — or the Indian getting near to any patients
to save the patients.

Anyhow, I got a reputation for being the only person who ever wrote down
any of the methodology of what we were doing. \[Laughter\]. You were
supposed to remember it all, so it was ridiculous because the med
students would come in to the lab all the time. They were required to do
these various liver function tests and what have you. But I started a
book where I kept a record of every single procedure. So my book became
quite popular with the med students, I remember, because I had all the
information on what they were supposed to do.

They were good years. I made some excellent friends there. We had all
the theater, all the museums, everything, just walking. London is a
fantastic place. As I progressed in those years — I guess I had about
eight years in London — I, of course, moved to nicer quarters, had my
own apartment off Sloane Street, just beautiful, just around the corner
from Harrods. It was absolutely fabulous, just terrific years.

Then I decided to go and do my Ph.D.

Shapiro: Excuse me. Did you have a dog at that time?

Orlans: No. I was out all day long. No. It was impossible. My parents
were looking after Topper, so I would only see him when I went up to
Birmingham to visit.

Shapiro: So there was no special interest in animals in that period. You
wouldn’t go to the zoo?

Orlans: Not at all. So then I became great friends with an immunologist
who worked in the lab next to me. She was a considerable intellectual
and opened up all sorts of doors for political activism, joining the
Russian-English group interested in communism, and books. I really began
to get an education in those years and thinking about all sorts of
issues that I hadn’t faced before. Certainly politics became an issue,
but more importantly literature and culture in general. That all opened
up in London.

Shapiro: Were your politics left?

Orlans: Yes, very much so.

Shapiro: Socialist.

Orlans: Absolutely. We were all socialists, sure. I always voted for the
Labour Government, currently Tony Blair’s party.

Shapiro: This was late 40s? What year was this?

Orlans: This was 1949 and the early 50s and up until ’56. We were all
very left-wing. Some of the group that I hung around with had been
active in communism over in Europe. There were a number of European
refugees and so on at that time. They were just fabulous, the best
period, one of the best periods of my life really.

Shapiro: Your literary interests — were they specific or just reading
novels?

Orlans: I read all the standard stuff that everybody knows.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

Shapiro: You had mentioned Frank Harris, who I’m not familiar with.
Perhaps you want to tell us who that is.

Orlans: He’s a British author who wrote banned books. They were banned
by the Roman Catholic Church. We would follow what books were banned. We
could bring them over from the Continent because it was a period in my
life when I spent a lot of time \[there\]. We’d go to Paris for the
weekends. That was one of the major entertainments. We had a lot of
friends in Europe. So it was fun to do that. But also I went into
serious reading. I read \[Michel de\] Montaigne, a 16th century
philosopher. It became a sort of bible for me and \[I\] kept it by my
bedside for reading for years.

Shapiro: What about Montaigne?

Orlans: He writes about his philosophy and comments on the state of the
world. It’s very rich material, such a wide breadth of issues, and he
has a lot of erudite things to say. But there was also reading general
novels and just getting a general widespread literary education. That’s
when it began for me. Other pursuits were, again, the theater, which was
rich in London, and just getting to know London, which was a terrific
pleasure. I had a lovely book on getting to know London. I would go out
Sunday afternoons and explore London as part of my routine.

I had some wonderful apartments there. After that little humble place in
Collinswood Road, I moved to Knightsbridge. Gosh, it was wonderful, just
off Sloane Street. I lived on a street called Motcomb Street after which
I named one of my sons many, many years later. It was beautiful, a
beautiful part of London. There were the pubs to go to in the evening,
one along Kinnerton Street just off Motcomb Street where there is a
fellow who played the zither some evenings. I had a good group of
friends at that time, so we had just a terrific social life and a
beginning to blossom intellectual life as well.

So then I decided to apply to do a Ph.D. in physiology and got accepted
at King’s College in the University of London. I think I spent three of
four years — I don’t remember quite — doing that. I got a master’s
degree at first, because I wasn’t all that terribly ambitious. A
master’s sounded fine for me to begin with.

Shapiro: What was your intent in going to physiology at the graduate
level?

Orlans: I don’t even remember.

Shapiro: What would one have done with that if they had —

Orlans: Research, I suppose. I’ve never thought of myself professionally
very ambitious. But also I didn’t want to stay in that biochemistry
laboratory, not that I had anything against it. But it didn’t seem to me
to be a stopping point in one’s progress as a career. It’s pretty
humdrum stuff. So the years at King’s College were very agreeable but
very hard. By that time I had learned how to study. It wasn’t until I
got into graduate school that I had a clue about how to use libraries
and do anything and think and plan things and have experiments and so
on.

I was doing animal research for both my master’s degree and my Ph.D. My
master’s degree, I remember, was on the esophagus and the musculature
there. It was quite fascinating. Then I went on to do work on sodium and
potassium exchanges in muscle cells. I don’t think I was brilliant or
anything, but I got enough published papers or whatever you needed to
get through.

Then it was time to move.

Shapiro: Are we moving from graduate school?

Orlans: Yes. Do you want more?

Shapiro: I just want to ask you if there was anything else you can tell
us about the animal laboratory experience. Was that the same as in
college, or did you — what was your sense of it?

Orlans: Nothing very spectacular. The animals were looked after quite
nicely. My work was on guinea pigs quite a bit. I remember the cats were
all kept very nicely \[by\] a very nice woman. The cats were all loose
in quite a big sunny room and all seemed to be happy there. There was
good oversight of the whole setup of both the animal quarters and the
experimentation. Again, the Professor \[Robert\] McDowell I was working
with, he was quite an eminent physiologist. He kept a pretty sharp hand
on us, maybe half a dozen or so Ph.D. students, and would be very
careful to see that everything was in compliance with the law. There
wasn’t anything very invasive going on.

Shapiro: It wasn’t an issue for you.

Orlans: Not an issue.

Shapiro: I wonder if you had any sense of the relationships between
non-human and human animals in that you were studying physiology and
anatomy. Did you have a sense of similarity and difference?

Orlans: It never occurred to me. No, I don’t think I really broached
anything from that point of view.

Shapiro: You weren’t struck by the similarity between the esophagus in
the guinea pig and the —

Orlans: Yes, we did a bit of comparative stuff, but it was purely on a
scientific basis.

Shapiro: That’s what I’m asking about. Even scientifically you must have
drawn some position about the relative similarity.

Orlans: Sure. That was the rationale behind all of our animal research
work after all, that it had relevance to what humans were doing.

Shapiro: So as part of your socialization, you learned that one can
learn from studying the other animal.

Orlans: That’s right. It was basic research in muscle physiology that I
was involved with. Whatever I learned from the animals that I was using
was certainly intended to be relevant to human physiology.

Shapiro: And you found it so?

Orlans: Yes, absolutely. I did some work on some asthmatic children, I
remember, at the children’s hospital. But it was all on musculature.

Shapiro: Were you drawn to the asthmatic because of your mother in some
way, or was that just incidental?

Orlans: Not really. It was just that the opportunity came up. No, it was
not that.

Shapiro: Anything about your relationship with your family during that
graduate period that you want to share?

Orlans: I loved my stepmother dearly. I think things sort of crept along
all right with father. I think when you’re separated finally you begin
to turn around and see that maybe they have their good points after all.
As the years went by, I learned to love my father. I truly loved him.
And with the siblings, again, a very good relationship with Gwennie and
the other two sisters. Again, we just had healthy relationships.

Shapiro: Were they up in Birmingham or —

Orlans: No, they were scattered. Two of them, Peggy and Sylvia, were in
the army for a period. I don’t know whether I’ve got the time set up
correct, but they were called up in the forces during the Second World
War. I guess this is postwar anyhow, I’m sorry. I’m out of kilter here.
But just friendly all around. The most important things in my life were
my own social group, of course.

Shapiro: So that takes you through the Ph.D. What year are we in?

Orlans: ’56. Then I thought it would be fun to go abroad. I had this
international set of friends in London and loved to travel. I had done a
lot of going to Europe during my student days. You could fly to Paris
for ten pounds return in those days. \[Laughter\]. So it was easy.
Friday evening you just go.

I sorted through where I wanted to go and live. It had to be
English-speaking because I wasn’t any good at languages. I had done
French and German enough to get through the exams, but I wasn’t any good
at it. So America seemed to be a very likely place. I had a few American
friends. So that was it. I came for one year. That was my intent. It was
great.

I came over at the time of what was commonly called the brain drain. It
was shortly postwar. Jobs were “ten to a penny” in this country, quite
hard to get in England, which was a lot poorer, still suffering postwar
problems, financial problems. I came on a one-way ticket. I spent the
first two weeks having interviews, often two a day in the morning and in
the afternoon.

Shapiro: So it was without a position?

Orlans: Yes. I had written to a number of places — \[Johns\] Hopkins
\[University\], Mayo Clinic, and so on — to get a job in physiology
research. I had set up two interviews a day for myself for about two
weeks. Things snowballed so that you could quickly pick up things from
one place where you were being interviewed. I got offered about ten
academic jobs in two weeks. It was out of this world. They were so avid
for anybody with any paper credentials. I was offered jobs in fields
that I had no knowledge of. I remember being offered a job in
biophysics. I had never even taken a course in biophysics. But because
you’ve got that piece of paper from London University, you know, it
could get you anywhere you liked.

I ended up at Hopkins because that seemed to be a world-renowned place
to be. But I hated Baltimore because it was just like Birmingham — very
dirty and lots of slums and lots of crime. That was a big issue for me
because I had been used to living in London where it didn’t matter what
time of night you went out. You could walk anywhere in London in those
days without any fear whatsoever — ever. It just wasn’t part of your
life.

So it was a tremendous culture shock for me when I got to Hopkins and
started looking for an apartment. I was told, “Oh, there where you want
is up there, but you can’t walk up that street. You’ve got to go three
sides around the block to get there because it’s a dangerous street.”
Within the first week of working there, one of the nurses in the
hospital was murdered. I was working downtown at the hospital, and I was
horrified by the whole thing. This was not the place for me. And
Baltimore was very ugly in those days. It really was a yucky place. This
was all before Mayor \[William Donald\] Schaeffer, of course. It’s not
so bad now.

But anyhow, I wasn’t all that fascinated in the work I was doing. Again,
it was some musculature stuff. I started applying for jobs and got a job
at NIH \[National Institutes of Health\] and within two or three months
I moved to Washington. I didn’t know an awful lot about all the research
that was going on, but I knew the name of the scientist who was going to
interview me. So I went off to the library and read many of his papers.
It was ridiculous. A few hours work in the library, I could go in and
say, “Yes, yes, this, that, and the other.” So it sounded as if you knew
a little bit about what’s going on. That was enough. They didn’t need
much in those days along with your Ph.D.

That started off the whole period of work in chemical pharmacology. The
laboratory chief I worked for, Bernard Brodie, turned out to be an
eminent pharmacologist. He was quite a notable fellow and worked with
\[Julius\] Axelrod, the Nobel Prize winner. It was a good group. I don’t
think I was ever very good at research. I don’t think I was at all
inspired, but I worked hard and had a satisfactory publication record.

Shapiro: You were developing your own projects.

Orlans: Yes, sure. We worked as a group. Brodie kept a pretty tight rein
on what we all did. It all had to fit into the whole picture of what we
were doing with serotonin release in the brain. It was the very early
days for this work. Nobody had a clue what was going on with serotonin
in those days. Anyhow, it was fascinating and I enjoyed it.

During that period I got married. I became pregnant fairly quickly with
the first of my two sons and so left in 1960. That was ’56 to ’60 that I
was at NIH in the labs. And I got to be known during that period as “the
animal lady” because I did care about the laboratory animals very much.
I was shocked by what I found in the animal houses of the way they were
kept.

Shapiro: So the issue came to your attention when you came to the United
States because the conditions there were different from what you were
used to.

Orlans: Yes. Much poorer. The technicians — caretakers — were a rotten
lot of workers who were supposed to clean the cages and keep the animals
watered and fed. The work wasn’t done. You would go into the animal
room, and it stank. I mean, it was a stench. I would look after my own
animals. They were mice and rats and guinea pigs mainly. Occasionally I
did a bit of work on some dogs during that period. Very often, whether I
needed to or not for the experiment, to check the experiment, I would go
in on Saturdays and Sundays just to clean the cages and see that all the
animals had water. I’d do it for everybody’s animals, everybody in that
whole room, because you couldn’t leave the animals that way. It was not
good. So I got a bit of a reputation. The other investigators knew I
would go in on the weekend and look after the animals.

Shapiro: How was that viewed? Was it positive or negative?

Orlans: They were glad to have it done.

Shapiro: They didn’t think it was peculiar.

Orlans: I don’t think so, no. I mean, they wouldn’t have come in for
their own animals, but they were quite happy. I don’t think it mattered
terribly much to them, because if it did matter, they’d have gone in and
looked after their own animals.

Shapiro: So you saw a difference in the attitudes of the investigators
and researchers.

Orlans: Absolutely.

Shapiro: What was that difference? Just a relative lack of caring?

Orlans: None of them had had any training whatsoever; there weren’t any
laws at that time in the United States. None of them had had any
training concerning humane attitudes or methodology. We would be doing
surgery and having to do this new thing. Nobody knew what we had to do.
We made it up as we went along. We didn’t have any veterinarian as an
advisor to us. We got through the surgery \[with\] a bit of trial and
error. We were doing Draize eye irritancy tests. I did it myself.

Shapiro: What is that, a Draize?

Orlans: Some of the work I did was to look at new drugs that were of
potential use in high blood pressure. I was in the heart institute. You
had the whole routine of standard tests you did on any new drug that the
pharmaceutical companies supplied to us in abundance to get the basic
data on the toxicity and various actions, physiological actions and so
on. It included the lethal end point, so we did the LD-50 in which you’d
test the dosage to find out what dosage will kill fifty percent of the
animals. We did the Draize eye irritancy tests which tell you what
concentration of this substance would blind the animals. You have a
chart, you read off how much damage you’ve done to the eye, going from
minor to blindness. But that was part of what you did in those days.

We had very nice facilities. This was NIH, after all, consuming millions
of dollars. The fellow who was a biochemist who worked on the next bench
along from me was doing some work on mitochondria. His work involved
coming in in the morning and picking up a mouse by its tail and dropping
it into a Waring blender, which is like a home blender for food with
whirring blades. The mouse is chopped to death over a course of — what?
— a minute or two? I don’t know what, how long it takes to chop up a
mouse. But it was thoroughly unpleasant to me. The mouse was put in live
and conscious.

I would speak up on these issues. Of course, that’s how I got my
reputation. We certainly didn’t know how to kill a dog. People were
frightened at that time to use Nembutal or give an overdose of an
anesthetic because they kept saying, “This might have interfered with
the biochemical reactions or the disposition of the drug that we’re
studying.” It would interfere with the results, so that was an issue of
how you were going to kill the animals. There were a number of things
that troubled \[me\]. It was an enormous culture shock — enormous.

Then I became a member of the American Society for Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, ASPET, which is the professional association
for pharmacologists. You have to be several years post-Ph.D. and have
published enough papers before you can get into this society. It’s sort
of a prestige thing to get there. This society is part of the umbrella
group of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology.
FASEB is the most important umbrella group for experimental scientists
of all different disciplines. Christine Stevens had access in those days
to the mailing list for FASEB members. Later FASEB denied her access to
their mailing list because they objected to her message.

Shapiro: Who is Christine Stevens?

Orlans: Christine Stevens is, to this day, the president of the Animal
Welfare Institute here in Washington, an organization that she had
founded with her father, who was a professor of physiology at the
University of Michigan. They founded that in 1951. It must have been
about ’59 when I was a member of FASEB. I started receiving the
Information Report, the newsletter from the Animal Welfare Institute.

Shapiro: You just received that as a matter of course?

Orlans: Yes. Just because I was a member of FASEB. I had no personal
contact with Christine at all. This was my first introduction to this
organization. It interested me. It was obviously coming from a strongly
animal welfare perspective, talking about the potential for having any
legislation on experimental animals in this country — which didn’t come
in, you see, until 1966 — and of the political action of the Animal
Welfare Institute in this respect.

I don’t remember clearly what the first meeting was with Christine. In
the early 1960s I met her. I remember doing some lobbying with her on
legislation, what eventually ended up as the ’66 legislation. But, of
course, there were a number of bills that were introduced and didn’t get
anywhere. Christine was leaning quite heavily initially on trying to
introduce some licensing system in the US similar to that which was in
the UK. Obviously, I was a good candidate for being involved with this
because I had held a license.

Shapiro: Do you think she sought you out in some way?

Orlans: I must have made the first move, because she wouldn’t have known
that I existed or what my attitudes were. I remember going with her on
the Hill. I was taken around to \[Senator Joseph S.\] Clark, \[Senator
Warren\] Magnuson, and other legislators whom I don’t even remember. The
National Society for Medical Research, NSMR, the lobbying organization
for the biomedical community, was putting out information saying how
terribly unhappy all the British experimental animal scientists were
because they were so constrained, that they couldn’t do any research,
and so on. It was just a whole lot of garbage.

Shapiro: So NSMR was a pro-research organization in the United States.

Orlans: Yes. I learned from Christine to hate this group. \[Laughter\].
She gave me heavy doses to indoctrinate me — if I can use that term —
into the evils of this pro-, terribly pro-animal-research group that was
contending that everything was lily white in the laboratories. Indeed,
that was the stand of the biomedical community all the way through the
congressional hearings. “There’s nothing wrong. Don’t touch us.
Everything is perfect.”

In fact, you may have been there last year \[2001\] when Frank Loew, an
eminent veterinarian in this country, gave a lecture at the National
Academy of Sciences recounting how his own experiences when he was in
the final year of vet school in 1966. He was just graduating the year
the bill finally went through. He read passages from the Congressional
testimony of his professor of physiology which said how perfect were all
the housing conditions for the animals. “We don’t need any laws. We’re
doing everything perfectly already.” This was the party line. Frank’s
own opinion of laboratory conditions were very contrary to that of his
professor.

Shapiro: Did they know better? Did they know the British experience or
were they just —

Orlans: Well, they were talking there about the American opposition to
animal protection laws. It served their purpose to say that British
scientists couldn’t cope with all these laws because they hampered them
so much. They were rotten laws, the claimed.

Shapiro: So they were aware of the British laws, but they argued that
they were too constraining.

Orlans: Some of them knew. Others didn’t know. Only a small fraction
actually had had any personal experience in England, but that was their
line, their strategy. There was a lot of deception and lying that went
on from the hierarchy of the biomedical community.

Shapiro: Including the people at NIH.

Orlans: Yes, of course. Peer pressure was such that you would never
admit to anything ever being wrong. You were an outcast if you suggested
such a thing. It was very strong pressure, very strong. I suffered from
it during my years at NIH later. Certainly I was considered as an
outcast.

There were two periods I had at NIH — one when I was doing research
(1956-1960) and then a later period when I went back totally in
administration (1974-1984). Throughout both of those periods I was known
as the animal lady. It was in the later period when secretaries, it
would be primarily, would come to me and tell me about things that
really troubled them, of experiments they had read about or seen at NIH.
They wanted to see them stopped. It was too harmful to the animals. The
animal was crying or whatever, and they had come to me to try to get
some help.

Shapiro: So there was a period when you were the animal person, but it
was sympathetic. You, in a sense, were taking care of the animals for
them. But then I guess in the context of the legislation, the view began
to shift so that you were more critically viewed.

Orlans: Yes. There were a whole number of years in the 1960s when I was
having association with Christine Stevens where I became politically
active and politically dedicated to getting some legislation in this
country.

Shapiro: In the year ’60 where did you move to?

Orlans: I just stopped work. I had a baby and went home. But it was in
later years when I wasn’t doing animal research but only administration
and doing grant review. It was then that the secretaries would read or
sometimes see the experiments going on that troubled them deeply,
injecting one hundred percent alcohol into dogs’ hearts to give a heart
attack and so on and all sorts of devices to give heart attacks. I was
again back in the heart institute. That formative period of meeting
Christine Stevens was the deciding point in my life as to what my views
were, where I wanted to go, and an absolute turning point insofar as I
realized that I wanted to only work for animal activism from then on.

Shapiro: Do you have some early impressions of Christine?

Orlans: Beautiful. \[Laughter\]. Physically so beautiful. As an aside,
the fiftieth year commemoration of the Animal Welfare Institute is being
celebrated this year \[2002\]. I just picked up a couple of days ago the
—

Shapiro: The quarterly?

Orlans: Well, it’s a special issue, I think. It’s lovely reading to go
back to those days and with this perfectly phenomenal picture of
Christine. She looks like Grace Kelly or the most beautiful woman in the
world you can think of. \[She is\] just so gracious, humble,
phenomenally fierce in her attacks on animal research, a poor public
speaker but nevertheless riveting before a congressional committee,
because she had all the facts there. She and Dorothy Dyce, who was
working with her at that time, did a tremendous job of visiting the
laboratories to collect evidence of abuses. They had all the facts
there, indisputable, of major transgressions in housing and
experimentation.

Shapiro: These were transgressions that weren’t illegal.

Orlans: Well, there wasn’t any law.

Shapiro: There wasn’t any law, so these are transgressions that are just
opinion.

Orlans: Well, moral transgressions. It was due to the quarterly reports
from the Animal Welfare Institute that I first learned of the problem of
science fairs in the high schools from something that Christine sent or
wrote. It spurred me to go and visit the local science fair in
Montgomery County, Maryland, here where I live. By this time I’d got two
babies, but I would go off. Every science fair I visited was absolutely
horrific.

This is where some of these pictures come in. I’ve got some pictures of
some of them.\[2\] The type of projects that were going on by anything
from an eleven-year-old to, say, a seventeen-year-old — they were the
most cruel and inhumane projects on live animals that you could dream
up. You couldn’t even dream them up, they were so evil and incredible.

This particular one I’m looking at here — it’s called the effect of
rotation on a mouse. You’ve got a gramophone set up. You know, in the
olden days when you had — I guess it was in the days of the 33s. You put
a coffee can with the top and bottom taken out. You put the mouse in the
middle, and then you start the gramophone to work. Then you would wait
and see what were the effects of prolonged centrifugal force on this
animal. Well, he died from the stress. Others just came out bedraggled
and absolutely traumatized. This project became exceedingly popular.

Another very popular one was to inject a toxic substance like cleaning
fluid, readily available from any drug store, into a pregnant rabbit or
any other pregnant animal. Then you would see how many dead or deformed
babies the animal would produce.

Shapiro: This is high school level?

Orlans: This is junior and senior high school level. They were bound to
give you results. There wasn’t going to be any halfway measure on these
projects. You could see the animals dead and deformed, so you have
pictures of these or the actual animals themselves on show at the fairs.
I could go on for a couple of hours, so let me keep this brief.

I was just appalled. These were supposed to have been supervised by
their teacher. They were approved by the judges. They were on public
exhibition. The siblings of the students themselves, sometimes little
kiddies, four or five, would go around and learn about how their sibling
had deformed or killed a live animal. So I did a whole series of
articles for the Animal Welfare Institute on this.\[3\] The
documentation on that, when I read it today, it still makes me cry. It’s
so horrific. You put a guinea pig in a shoe box and you blow in
cigarette smoke until it dies. This was very popular with the teachers
because that would teach you not to smoke!

The \[National\] Dairy Council gave out mice to high schools free of
charge, along with instructions for a project where you’d give the mice
abnormal, unpalatable food for several weeks until they showed all the
symptoms of malnutrition, of losing weight \[and\] hair, becoming very
unkempt, sometimes blindness and not able to walk. Then you’d give them
milk. Some of them, if you caught it early enough, would begin to show a
bit of recovery. It went on and on.

The National Cancer Society put out a booklet on how high school
students could cure cancer. This was the claim. You are going to help
cure cancer by doing this experiment. Then they’d give you a mouse.
Scientists at NIH and elsewhere were free and easy with giving out
cancer tumorous mice to high schools students. It was very popular. So
you’d take the mouse home, and within a month it’s dead. And so it went
on.

Shapiro: There were no regulations or guidelines? It was unrestricted?

Orlans: No, they had rules, but they were hopeless. They’re virtually
nothing, but they had something on paper. Then I started making
objections. This was really the most important thing in my life, this
particular activity with the science fairs, where I think I made the
most contribution, because nobody else was doing this. I really made a
point of dedicating my life to seeing that this situation be changed.
And it was eventually. I would talk to the teachers, to whoever
organized the science fair, to the various government departments like
NASA, who were encouraging the students to send up mice in rockets,
homemade rockets. I did the rounds to everybody I could think of who was
involved to try to get them to —

Shapiro: Were you doing this independently or were you with AWI, Animal
Welfare Institute?

Orlans: Well, anything that was worth writing up, I would write it up
for AWI. Dorothy Dyce also did some fact finding and writing for AWI.
Christine was one hundred percent behind me, unlike anybody else. I
visited with HSUS \[Humane Society of the United States\]. That was in
the days of Oliver Evans — lukewarm. Christine said, “I am one hundred
percent behind you,” and she was. She would publish whatever I wanted to
say. She would devote whole issues of the Animal Welfare Institute
report to these horrendous things. So obviously the bond between us
became very strong.

Shapiro: Was there a rebuttal from anybody?

Orlans: Yes. The National Society for Medical Research\[4\] would rebut
some of the articles that I wrote. I remember them running an article on
a high school student who had done some work on heart worm in a dog,
claiming this was a significant contribution to science. The rules were
just a piece of paper. Science Service, the organization that ran this
science fair, the International Science and Engineering Fair, looked for
counsel on this issue, so they turned to the National Society for
Medical Research. It was the job of NSMR, who were painting a lily white
picture of their professional scientists, to also paint a lily white
picture of the high school students. They became responsible for
devising the rules, seeing that the rules were implemented. Of course,
it was all totally hopeless, absolutely hopeless. They had no provisions
about the use of anesthesia when needed for surgery so that some high
school kids would force feed the animals alcohol and think that that was
an anesthetic, which of course it isn’t, and then open up the abdomen or
whatever to do some surgery.

Shapiro: The students were doing surgery.

Orlans: Oh, sure. They did monkey surgery, brain surgery on monkeys in
their home basements and garages. The monkeys would be provided by
professional scientists. The American Medical Association, as Christine
reported, gave a prize one year to a sixteen-year-old boy who had done
some monkey surgery in his garage. He was lauded at a dinner given by
the American Medical Association for his wonderful work.\[5\]

So NSMR’s role was all a case of attuning students to harming animals
and getting them used to the whole idea that any animal research is
okay. So they’d put out publications to talk about “sophisticated
science” student projects. What “sophisticated” meant was that you did
something very traumatic to the animal. You did surgery, gave a toxic
substance, anything really invasive.

\[C. Everett\] Koop, the surgeon general, in his autobiography\[6\]
recounts how during that period in the 60s he would capture cats in his
back garden wherever he was living — I think it was New York — and he
would do surgery on them as a high school student. Then he would let
them loose. He would take anyone’s cats. It wasn’t cats that he knew. He
would take any cat he happened to be able to capture. It was perfectly
okay in those times to do that. Koop writes about this with no sense of
apology. It was “here I was, a brilliant surgeon-to-be, how young I
started, wasn’t this marvelous.” But indeed, this was the attitude of
NSMR: It’s marvelous if the students will start at eleven, however young
you can.

I came across a school where they were five- and six-year-olds. The
teachers had them dissecting mice and pigeons and various other animals.
This was big time because this was “sophisticated” science. You are
aping the professional scientists. These little kiddies of five and six
wore white gowns to pretend they were doctors.

\[End Tape 1, Side B; Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Shapiro: This is side three. We’re talking about the science fairs.

Orlans: The most critical issue of all, and the turning point came in
May 1969 when I went to visit the Westinghouse Science Talent Search
down at the Sheraton Hotel in Washington, DC. There were two types of
science fairs going on at that time, the International Science and
Engineering Fair that I’ve been speaking about and this Westinghouse
Science Talent Search. They were both administered by the same
organization, Science Service. The Westinghouse was even more
prestigious than the International Science and Engineering Fair. The
prizes were considerable. They were two hundred and fifty dollars for
each of the forty winners. This was the top of the line for prestige.

It was a snowy day, and I left the children and went downtown at opening
time. These were public exhibitions to demonstrate the work of these
forty finalists. One of the finalists I could not get away from because
it was so horrifying. This girl who had done this project was a
seventeen-year-old from Richmond, Virginia. She had been working at the
University of Texas at Austin for a summer period during the preceding
year to help with some research work on cognition — well, unsightedness
really, how blind people or animals see, perceive even though their
nerves lack function. She had learned about this whole topic at the
university.

Then she came home and she purchased five sparrows, ordinary common
garden sparrows. She then wanted to do her own individual project
involving seeing how blinded sparrows could perceive light.\[7\] She
blinded all five sparrows by removing their eyeballs, which I learned
later from several ornithologists whom I spoke to that it’s exceedingly
difficult to anesthetize birds in the first place. Obviously the whole
business of removing their eyeballs must have been incredible for the
birds.

The project then involved putting them in a Y-shaped maze, putting them
in the single tunnel before it branched out to two side tunnels. One
side tunnel was dark and it had an electric shock in it. The other arm
of the Y had light and it had a reward of a pellet of food. She put the
bird in the single arm, the blinded birds, to see if they would walk and
which direction they would choose out of the Y, the light or the dark.
If they went to the dark, they got punished. If they went to the light,
she assumed that they perceived the light and they were then rewarded
with food. She found that the birds were so traumatized from the
blinding that they didn’t move at all. In order to josh them along to
walking she thought that she had better starve them, because then they
would be more motivated to go and seek the food. So she did that. It was
total starvation for five weeks.

Her conclusion, which I can recall I think verbatim, written on her
prize-winning board, said that “if you starve sparrows to seventy
percent of their body weight, they are likely to die.” In point of fact,
with this five weeks of starvation, three of the blinded sparrows did in
fact die. This girl got a two hundred and fifty dollar prize. It had
gone through all of the series of judges through this very prestigious
talent search and considered of the highest order.

I saw this and I couldn’t get away from it. I kept going back and going
back to this young girl to ask her more about what she had done and why
she had done it, where did she get the sparrows, and so on. It was all
done at home.

Shapiro: No supervision whatsoever.

Orlans: No. Although she had gotten the basic idea from the university
project.

Shapiro: She’s a high school student.

Orlans: She’s a high school student. I kept harassing her. She certainly
claimed afterwards that I was harassing her, because I did repeatedly go
back to her. I was so deeply troubled by the whole thing. I phoned up
Christine from the hotel — Christine Stevens. I didn’t have a camera
with me, and I could have kicked myself. I was totally hopeless at
photography, and this of all the things needed photographing to take
home the evidence. I phoned her. She said, “Try to get a photographer.”
So I phoned up some professional photographers, but it was snowing badly
by that time. It was getting on in the afternoon. It was a Saturday
afternoon. It was hopeless. I’ve got to just do it by word of mouth.

I had a long talk with Christine, gave her all the details. She then
took it from there and got in touch with the Chicago Tribune. I have the
articles, I’m sure, in a file somewhere of this reporter, Bob Cromie,
who did a series of articles on what high school students are doing in
their biology projects and damning it. Within a matter of a couple of
days, the New York Times\[8\] came out with an editorial called “Prizes
for Torture,” which said that this was what was happening, students were
getting prizes for torturing animals.

It was a total embarrassment for the Westinghouse people who, without
any consultation with the Animal Welfare Institute or myself, jumped to
and, within a matter of two or three months, changed their rules. It was
a real coup for us. They changed their rules to say — and these rules
are maintained to this day — that high school students shall do no
project on live animals that involves harming or killing them, or words
to this effect. This is not verbatim. Really vertebrate animal
experimentation was prohibited. The only projects that they were allowed
to do were observations of pet animals, companion animals, observations
of zoo animals or wild animals.

The teachers were enraged. The hierarchy at the National Association of
Biology Teachers were infuriated. I had a vituperative phone call from
the high school teacher of this student, railing me for my interference
with this brilliant student, who did in fact go on to medical school.
God knows how she ever ended up treating her patients. I suffered,
believe me, plenty of attack as a result of telling that story. I got
berated by my old boss from NIH. Anyhow, you just withstand all of that.
It goes with the territory. If you complain about anything that’s
accepted by the community, you know you’re in lots of trouble.

Anyhow, we got success, the rules were tightened, and that was the main
thing. The International Science and Engineering Fair went on in their
bad ways. They have made some changes. I follow the rules pretty well
every year. They do get a bit better. They’ve even acknowledged that the
Three Rs of refinement, reduction, and replacement exist. They’ve now
banned the Draize test and the LD-50 tests for high school students,
because that was another very popular thing for high school students to
do because they’re easy tests to do. You’re bound to get results.
They’re dead or they’re blinded or have impaired eyesight. They’re nice,
tidy experiments, nothing ambiguous about the results.

Anyhow, that’s basically the story. There’s still problems. Some of the
anti-vivisection societies have continued to visit science fairs and to
cause trouble, by complaining, that is. But there’s still work to be
done in that area.

Shapiro: Do you know anything about — I think one of the groups now
provides an award for —

Orlans: Yes. The National Anti-Vivisection Society will do that for the
first time in 2002. This was something I was pressing for, frankly, many
years ago. I think the Mass. SPCA \[Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals\] perhaps at one time did that, to give
an award for a really humane project of treating animals in some
improving way for the animals’ welfare. But by and large, I’m still very
critical of the science fair movement. However, they have tightened up
on supervision and have banned home experiments.

Shapiro: I was going to ask that. It has to be done under supervision at
school.

Orlans: Yes. They have to be done under supervision either at school or
at a research institution. Some projects are done at a university. But
the Animal Care and Use Committees, responsible for institutional
oversight, are very accommodating to any project that a high school
student wants to put forward, even if it involves pain and death of the
animal.

Shapiro: The animal use committee of the university.

Orlans: That’s right. So there’s still a lot wrong. But monkey surgery
is out. Monkey surgery was one of the first things to be prohibited.

It was very difficult to get anybody else involved in this work. I tried
very hard to get colleagues to come to science fairs with me or to visit
fairs in other parts of the country. I could only do the environs of
Washington, DC. Nina Natelson I remember was helpful. She did some work
on this.

Shapiro: Nina is with?

Orlans: The Israeli group.

Shapiro: CHAI \[Concern for Helping Animals in Israel\].

Orlans: That’s right, CHAI. But it was not something that anybody ever
congratulated me for doing. \[Laughter\]. Except Christine, really. All
the biology teachers that I knew, and I knew a number, gave me the cold
shoulder. And NSMR was obviously more damning of me than ever.

Shapiro: What do you think of attitudes these days of biology high
school teachers?

Orlans: Not very good.

Shapiro: Not very good?

Orlans: No. In fact, I want to reinvigorate people to start working in
this area because I’m still troubled by what I see. Two weeks ago I
visited a high school in the Washington, DC area. They invited me to go
to look over their program in animal biology which is to train rather
low academic achievers into being able to hold some sort of a job when
they get out of high school, either working in a pet store or in a zoo,
perhaps cleaning the cages, feeding the animals. It’s just basic animal
care. So the school keeps about forty or fifty different species of
various animals and insects and reptiles and so on. Their students come
in and learn how to clean the cages and what the animals’ reproduction
is and that sort of thing.

I learned when I was there — and this is the point of it — that NIH had
just within the last few months donated sixty mice to this particular
class to do some experiment which involved the death of all sixty mice
at the end of it. I asked the biology teacher, who was the chair of the
department, “Who did the killing?” He said, “Oh, I did.” He and one of
his colleague biology teachers. I said, “Well, do you know anything
about euthanasia and what are the approved methods? There are laws about
this. The American Veterinary Medical Association has written, a whole
big booklet on approved and disapproved methods.” Of course, he had
never heard of this. I was a guest there. I didn’t pursue further to ask
him how he had killed them. He did say that it was a thoroughly
unpleasant experience. He said, “Should I do this project again?” I said
absolutely no. I told him of my objections. Taxpayers money shouldn’t be
used in giving out experimental mice to high schools. This is a special
species of experimental mice, not just ordinary \[mice\].

Shapiro: You still have work to do.

Orlans: Yes.

Shapiro: This was your first issue.

Orlans: Yes.

Shapiro: I think you might have used the word “commitment” a while back.
You at some point made a commitment to work on this issue, I mean the
general issue of animal welfare in the early 60s.

Orlans: Yes. Absolutely. It seemed to me that there was so much to do. I
had had experience with professional scientists, and I had this
horrendous experience with these youngsters who didn’t know any better
and weren’t being taught anything about animal welfare or having a
humane attitude. It was so appalling. I couldn’t believe it from the
culture from which I had grown up. It was horrifying. In telling that
story about the starved and blinded sparrows, many a time I have wept.
It was powerful. \[Pauses\]. So what do you do? You keep on working. You
keep finding things to work on.

Shapiro: \[Pauses\]. Okay, we’ll both pause and deal with that.

Orlans: Yes. It takes a lot of stamina to be able to get through some of
these experiences.

Shapiro: I was going to ask you, you moved to a commitment to work on
animal welfare issues. You did so as a scientist. Were there any
accompanying changes in views of science and of its efficacy or benefits
that were part of this move, or was it simply a move toward animal
welfare?

Orlans: I think basically it was a move towards animal welfare but also
recognition of wasted animal lives, wasted animal pain, totally
pointless projects that were permitted and acclaimed.

Shapiro: Is this now a reference again to the high school projects or to
the science establishment?

Orlans: Primarily to the students, but also it had an overflow into the
professional scientists, because I can look back at some of my own work,
you know, and say, “Heavens, that should never have been done.”

Shapiro: It shouldn’t have been done.

Orlans: Sure. Absolutely. But you made a point a few minutes ago, Ken,
about the gender differences that we wanted to touch on. Certainly going
hand in hand with this experience of mine in the 60s with the high
school science fairs, there was, of course, the civil rights movement
and also the feminist movement, both of which movements I was involved
with — not to the extent that I wish I had done, I guess because I had
my little kiddies. But both those movements had, again, profound effects
on me.

The feminist movement I really was active in and used to go to meetings.
In my community here in Bethesda, Maryland there is a lot of racism. I
was very active with a community association where there was one
neighbor of mine, still is a neighbor just a couple of blocks away, who
at that time was running around the neighborhood trying to get
covenants, people to sign into covenants to keep out all the unwanted,
not only blacks but also the Jews, of course. So that was a big issue
for me, so a group of us fought hard on that front.

Shapiro: Was there any connection in your mind between the welfare of
animals and these other oppressed groups?

Orlans: I think so, yes. You fit it all together as being very
vulnerable subjects. That was the main issue.

Shapiro: Did you have any feeling about your own gender and your own
career, any influence in terms of closed doors or open doors?

Orlans: I think I spoke up most particularly on the animal issues, but I
certainly wasn’t tardy in speaking up on feminist issues and to a lesser
extent, as far as my apportionment of time, on civil rights movement.
They all are moral things. In the animal welfare movement certainly
there seems to be a strong hold of women. Most of the people I was
dealing with at that time and continue \[were\] women in the animal
welfare movement. Of course, there was Christine Stevens, who has had
more influence on my life than any other person.

Shapiro: Why don’t we stop here, Barbara, and take up next time the
story about the founding of SCAW.

Orlans: Okay. Good.

\[End of Session\].

F. Barbara Orlans

Session \#2

January 16, 2002

Bethesda, Maryland

Kenneth J. Shapiro, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 3, Side A\]

Shapiro: We’re about to start our fourth side, the first side of the
second session. This is the 16th of January, 2002. Barbara, we had
gotten up to the period when you began or got associated with the
Scientists Center for Animal Welfare. Tell us how that got going and the
context around the beginning of that.

Orlans: The spark for the organization, for starting up this
organization, came from Jeremy Stone, a remarkable man who had been very
active in the anti-nuclear weapons issues. He was the director of the
organization, the Federation of American Scientists, who were a bunch of
physicists basically who were pursuing that point. Out of the blue, he
wrote an article in October of 1977 called “Can Scientists Help the
Animal Kingdom?”\[9\] And another heading, “Scientists Ought to be
Playing a Constructive Role rather than a Rearguard Role.” It was a
remarkable piece. This went out to quite a large circulation of the
Federation of American Scientists. It argued the case that we need in
this country, the United States, an organization like the Universities
Federation of Animal Welfare in England, a well-established pioneer
group there who had been the first to publish anything on laboratory
practices, housing conditions, and welfare of laboratory animals. They
were a remarkable group led by Major \[Charles\] Hume. It was from there
that Jeremy got his inspiration. This was really the basis on which we
tried to organize the Scientists Center.

Within a month of this article coming out, Christine Stevens and others
started distributing this article of Jeremy’s all over the place. We
called a meeting. We met in the living room of my house. There were
about ten of us, I should say.

Shapiro: When you say we called a meeting, whose idea was it to proceed
on this?

Orlans: I think it was Christine’s urging me to take the lead on this.
So we did that. I do remember that Frank Loew was invited and sent a
very peculiar letter refusing to come. However, we did get a nice
turnout of enthusiastic people, including —

Shapiro: Will you identify Frank Loew? He was at Tufts \[University\] at
that time or not?

Orlans: He was at Baltimore at Johns Hopkins at that time, a leading
veterinarian in the country, known for his animal welfare views, I might
say. But anyhow, we had a little nucleus with some luminaries such as
Christine Stevens and Michael Fox. It was enough for us to start
meetings of about — I don’t remember the exact number — six or eight of
us, something like that, to try to decide what to do. We didn’t have any
idea what to do actually. It was very difficult to get started. We
didn’t know what was wanted. We tried to do a survey to find out what
people’s ideas \[were\]. It really didn’t work. We went ahead with
getting all the papers involved for chartering the organization, getting
a charitable organization established.

Shapiro: In what state was it incorporated?

Orlans: It must be Maryland, because we were operating entirely from my
house for several years. It was many years until we got an office or
anything other than me to do all the work, frankly. But we had this
newsletter, which wasn’t terribly exciting, but we were doing our best.

The thing that really pulled us up and got us on a direction was the
idea to have a conference. This took place in ’81 in Washington, DC. It
was well attended by about a hundred or so scientists and veterinarians,
including the acting director of NIH who was a friend of mine. I had
worked for him. He was tremendously supportive of the organization,
Thomas Malone, a fabulous man. However, another fellow from NIH also
attended — without paying his dues, I might say — but barged into the
meeting and tried to destroy what Tom was doing and saying. Tom gave a
very good keynote speech. But this other fellow, Leon Schwartz, tried to
really demolish us.

Indeed, this was a terrible problem at that time. The National Society
for Medical Research was out to get us in a big way. Articles were
written in medical journals saying that we were an anti-vivisection
society, which we were not, trying to destroy us individually as people.
They set a spy, no less than a spy, on me and my husband to try to get
some dirt. Within six months of starting up, we had an inquiry from the
oversight group for professional organizations. I’ve forgotten the name
of it. But it’s a very fine organization that looks into the honesty and
integrity of organizations and their financial responsibility.

Maurice B. Visscher was the president of NSMR at that time. We used to
call him Vicious Visscher. They called me an anti-vivisectionist. There
was a quote from an NSMR representative with a reporter from the Wall
Street Journal saying that I was a “hard-core anti-vivisectionist” on
page one. I was working at NIH at this time. It was destructive to my
career at NIH. I had to pay a fortune in legal fees to get the Wall
Street Journal to write a retraction of that, which came about six
months later at the bottom of page twenty or something like that.
\[Laughter\]. It doesn’t do you any good really.

Shapiro: It was directed at you as the executive director?

Orlans: Well, yes. That was established pretty much at the beginning as
to who should run the thing. It was, again, at Christine’s urging and
direction really that I should become the president of the organization.

Shapiro: So you were president of the board or you were the executive
director?

Orlans: I was just called the president of the board.

Shapiro: Were you salaried?

Orlans: No, no. Oh, no. We had no money. All of this was done on
evenings and weekends and from my bedroom or something like that. I
don’t even know that I had a study at that time in my life. In fact, I
do remember working on the dining room table. It was a lot of work,
needless to say. I started devoting hours and hours every week to this.

Shapiro: You’re still full-time employed?

Orlans: Yes. Putting out a newsletter, organizing the meetings, and
trying to get some direction. Then it was organizing the conference,
which of course was a lot of work and getting the speakers.

Shapiro: Let’s just back up one second. What was the mission statement
or what was the purpose? What had the group decided on?

Orlans: I haven’t looked at the initial by-laws for a long time, but the
purpose was based very much on that of UFAW, the Universities Federation
of Animal Welfare. That was to educate scientists about animal welfare;
to pursue the Three Rs of refinement, reduction, and replacement; to
seek improvements in animal housing conditions and use; quite broadly
stated good will towards animals, to laboratory animals only. We went no
further than that.

We managed to battle through all of these attacks. And this request from
this organization that wanted to know about our fiduciary responsibility
was just nonsense. We didn’t have any money and weren’t likely to have
any money for a long time to come. \[Laughter\]. Anyhow, we survived.
The conference was certainly a success. We were delighted with it. It
was run at the 4-H center on Connecticut Avenue in Washington, DC. We
were amazed at the number of people, and good people who came. They were
scientists. This was what we were trying to get to. And one or two quite
eminent people \[attended\], including veterinarians who were well
known. Andrew Rowan came. We thought we got off to a good start.

We published a book of the papers given there. That came out in ’82,
Perspectives on Animal Welfare.\[10\]

Shapiro: Who published that? Do you remember?

Orlans: That was Academic Press, New York. That began — that really set
the course for the rest of the period that I was involved with of
running conferences all over the country. We got cooperation from all
sorts of universities — University of Southern California, University of
Chicago. It was at Johns Hopkins in 1984 with John D. Strandberg, the
veterinarian there where we launched our first conference in conjunction
with the universities. The idea was to just really go to every
geographic region nationally, to present conferences that would discuss
animal welfare issues for laboratory animals. We talked about
legislation and getting laws in — of course, that was an issue. The use
of pound animals and housing conditions and so on. But the thrust was
very obvious what we were doing. We promoted the Three Rs — refinement,
reduction, and replacement of laboratory animals — pain control,
anesthetics, and so on.

Shapiro: Is there any ethical system or anything that was part of the
presentation?

Orlans: Not really, no. That hadn’t developed at that point.

Shapiro: This is post-\[Peter\] Singer but pre-\[Tom\] Regan.

Orlans: I don’t remember the dates of Regan, frankly.

Shapiro: ’83, ’85.

Orlans: Okay. We were certainly influenced by all these philosophers and
very much taken in with their views. The board got shuffled around, and
we were very anxious to bring in some scientists and people who would be
recognized as respectable, because here was NSMR on our tail, trying to
make us very unrespectable and trying to make us out to be funded
totally as a subset of the anti-vivisection movement. It was tough
going.

Shapiro: Do you remember who the initial board was?

Orlans: Yes. I can give you those names. It was John Beary, a physician,
a rheumatologist; Michael Fox, he is a veterinarian.

Shapiro: Already at HSUS?

Orlans: Already at HSUS. Christine Stevens, president of the Animal
Welfare Institute; Bianca Beary, John Beary’s wife, president of the
Washington Humane Society. She was exceedingly helpful in ideas. Jeremy
J. Stone, of course, and myself. That was the six of us who did it. We
would meet sometimes at Jeremy’s house, I remember, and we would always
start with a prayer session. It was all very inspirational for all of
us.

One of our pitfalls was our effort to bring in scientists, because we
were walking a tightrope, obviously, in that kind of situation. The
biomedical community is so entrenched in anti-legislation, basically
retaining the status quo in a very big way, no move for any change, keep
grabbing all the pound animals you can. That was the mentality. One of
the pitfalls was clearly the appointment of Richard J. Traystman, a
neuroscientist from Johns Hopkins. We were looking for the status of
Hopkins, you know, to have on our board. But he turned out to be a tried
and true advocate of the status quo.

Shapiro: So he was put on the board?

Orlans: Yes. It was very difficult choosing board members. It really
was.

Shapiro: Risky.

Orlans: Very, very risky. But I think the conferences were successful,
and they were well attended. They were the first conferences on
laboratory animal welfare in the country. We got publications out of
several of them. It started the whole trend. There are now many
publications from the Scientists Center that are considered to be quite
up to date on a lot of welfare issues. Especially then came the issue of
the institutional animal care and use committees. I wanted the
Scientists Center to be advocates of these groups.

Shapiro: What year, do you remember, that that was passed, the IACUC
\[Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee\]?

Orlans: In ’85 IACUCs were mandated. But before that, we were advocating
IACUCs as a good strategy for review and that we needed public members.
We were advocating having humane society people.

Shapiro: People outside the university.

Orlans: And, of course, any person who would be effective, but
especially humane society people. We were trying to breach the gap
between the humane movement and the biomedical community. The situation
was just totally polarized. These groups never spoke to each other. It
couldn’t have been worse.

Then my job became one of fundraising and writing grant applications.
The workload became enormous. I was devoting every evening, every
weekend. I didn’t do anything else other than \[this\].

Shapiro: Was there a membership?

Orlans: Yes. We organized an individual membership and then also
institutional memberships. Indeed, a few — not a great many but a few
pharmaceutical companies and universities started taking out membership.
The conferences started bringing in a trickle of money. We charged for
attendance. And the publications never made any money, but at least it
gave us some status, you know.

Then the job was to write the grant applications. One thing that was
very important to us was a fifty-thousand-dollar grant, which turned out
to be a one-time affair, which I hadn’t anticipated. But it was enough
to make me leave the National Institutes of Health. This was in 1984 and
I ran the organization out of my house.

Shapiro: Who was the grant from?

Orlans: It was from Emily Gloekler, a woman who had inherited a lot of
money from the organization HIS \[Humane Information Services\] in
Florida. The man who had been responsible for that, Fred Myers, had set
up a terrific organization. They were involved with the slaughter of
animals for meat and had done terrific work on that. He died and left
his secretary, Emily Gloekler, in charge of all the money. She was
totally incapable of doing this. It was an appalling mistake. The whole
thing just went to rot in short order. Anyhow, it did give us the
opportunity with this grant of fifty thousand for me to gamble on
stopping full-time work. I don’t remember if I took any salary or not. I
must have taken something because I needed it to live.

Then the terrible blow came when the grant was not renewed. I knew there
were millions of dollars in this fund, so I assumed that for sure I’d
get it again the next year. The heavens dropped when I found out no.
\[Laughter\]. The money was being frittered away on buying cars and God
knows what. Indeed, there was a court case on the use of the HIS money.
It became quite a cause célèbre.

Anyhow, we survived, and we did start getting money from the Simpson
Trust of the Rockefeller Foundation. And also the absolute godsend was
the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation. It was the Dodge Foundation to whom I
would really give all thanks and everything. They funded us for ten
years, all the time I was there. It came to be \[that\] I could rely on
it. That made an enormous difference when you’re working hand to mouth,
putting in eighty-hour weeks. It’s a pretty frazzling occupation and
something I’d never do again to set up a charitable organization. It is
a lot of work and terribly stressful.

But the Dodge Foundation were wonderful to us. I was always terrified
every year when I had to go up for the interview — well, sort of a
meeting with the request for a renewal of the grant, because Scott McVay
was the executive director, a brilliant man, who was terrifying to me
because he would ask me questions on all sorts of topics all over the
place. I was just so nervous that I wouldn’t be able to keep the
organization going and that I would fail somewhere. They had nothing to
do with animal welfare, you know. \[Laughter\]. I wasn’t anywhere near
as brilliant as this Scott McVay by a million miles, so it was a very
trying experience. Anyhow, it worked.

I was very involved, as I said before, with the use of animals in
education, so I continued with that effort and would go around to the
science fairs in the Washington area the way I always had. Not only did
I get my stuff published by the Animal Welfare Institute, which would
always take everything I wrote on all of the horrors of the science
fairs, but I started putting in pieces in the newsletter of the
Scientists Center. I remember one was called, the headline, “Misguided
Experiments” and detailing the killing of mice by making them inhale
only cigarette smoke and getting rabbits pregnant and injecting carbon
tetrachloride to see how many dead babies it would get and all that.

Well, this caused a schlimazel on the board. Jean Dodds was on the board
by then, and I got a very severe reprimand for —

Shapiro: She was?

Orlans: She was a veterinarian at the New York Department of Health in
Albany, a fairly well-known and certainly very well-respected
veterinarian. We had probably at that time two or three veterinarians on
the board, including Richard C. Simmonds, from the Naval Medical Center
here in Bethesda, and a veterinarian from the National Zoo. \[Devra G.\]
Kleiman. Anyhow, I really got out of line when I started writing these
sorts of things and criticizing the policies of the National Science
Teachers Association and the National Association of Biology Teachers.
NABT did actually come out with an excellent policy over the course of
time.

Shapiro: Was SCAW influential in that?

Orlans: Well, I did the rounds among the board members of the National
Association of Biology Teachers and got some friends. But I really was
getting into trouble at the Scientists Center. There was one article
criticizing the national policies governing high school students’ use of
animals of the National Science Teachers Association that was grabbed
from me at a board meeting and I was told I couldn’t possibly publish
this. I was, as a courtesy, showing the board what was coming out in the
next newsletter issue. It had just gone to press. So they stopped the
press.

Shapiro: Let me ask you a couple of procedural kind of questions just to
understand SCAW’s workings. What was the mechanism by which a board
person was invited onto the board?

Orlans: It was by consensus of the other board members. It was a
self-perpetuating board.

Shapiro: They nominated and then elected.

Orlans: Absolutely.

Shapiro: Membership didn’t vote.

Orlans: No, not at all.

Shapiro: Just de facto were you sort of listened to as the salaried —
you weren’t on the board at this point or you were still on the board?

Orlans: Yes, I was on the board. I was still the president for quite a
while.

Shapiro: President of the board. But you didn’t control, or how —

Orlans: I did everything.

Shapiro: Did you think that if you decided to put someone on the board
they would put that person on?

Orlans: No. It had to be discussed. Everything was decided by the board.
I think there wasn’t a position of executive director or anything like
that, because I just did everything. I did all the paperwork, all the
typing, everything for the newsletter, all the publications, everything.
That was, of course, a severe problem because it was so time-consuming
and I didn’t have any help, any secretarial help. I desperately needed
help, and I did finally — I don’t remember what year — get somebody to
come part-time two or three days a week to do some of the typing and
prepare the programs for the conferences and that sort of thing.

Then this schlimazel started about what I was writing for the
newsletter. Everything was beginning to get tainted at that point
because I was obviously speaking up too much and quite out of line with
the feelings of the board, which were that you should never criticize
anything as far as animal experimentation is concerned. I, having been
schooled more by Christine Stevens, was very much of the opinion that
you don’t get anywhere unless you say what’s wrong and give people
chapter and verse as to what needs to be corrected and then, of course,
try to be constructive as to what policies you need and oversight to get
things straightened out.

Shapiro: Did you have any allies on the board?

Orlans: Not much. A bit. But they were weak. They were all pretty weak.
\[Laughter\]. Jean Dodds, who was supposed to be my ally — she was the
vice president — turned out to be a critic. Andrew Rowan was on the
board, too. He too turned out to be a critic. I wasn’t taking the
strategies that they thought were needed at that time.

Shapiro: Just to clarify, these people were all, you think, genuinely
welfare people, but they just thought that you were being too what?

Orlans: Yes. Too outspoken, too critical, too critical of what was going
on. You were not supposed to do that.

Shapiro: It wasn’t really an ideological difference. It was a more
tactical, diplomatic kind of dispute.

Orlans: No, I was pushing harder anyhow all along the way. I think there
was an ideological difference also in terms of what I was striving for,
which would be much stronger legislation, much more control than what
the other board members would feel comfortable with.

Shapiro: Were they against any legislation or were they self-policing?

Orlans: No. They just wouldn’t open their mouths on that. One of the
board members, I remember, went around to several places testifying to
the Maryland state legislature in favor of taking pound animals for
biomedical research and that sort of thing. There was really a
difference of opinion and strategy, the whole shoot. I was right out on
the side.

Shapiro: And these people who were brought onto the board, there was no
acid test or there was no screening?

Orlans: Sometimes we didn’t know what we were getting. It was
ill-informed. It was very difficult. We didn’t know whom we were
appointing. There was nobody who had spoken out with criticisms of
current practices because nobody did speak out at that time.

Shapiro: And you needed people on the board, and you wanted scientists,
so you took your chances.

Orlans: Yes. And we suffered for it, because they didn’t all turn out
the way I wanted certainly. Far from it. But after this row, I can
rightly call it, about this article criticizing the policy of the
National Science Teachers Association, the barriers that were put on me
were enormous — it’s a tactic I had seen used at NIH. When you don’t
want somebody to do something, you put so many obstacles in their way
that it makes the job impossible, absolutely impossible. So producing
the newsletter, which had always been very onerous to me because I was
not a very fluent writer — it was tough going for me in that time to
produce these newsletters. I would have loved to have gotten rid of the
job. But then the board determined that I had to send drafts of every
article to all board members. \[Laughter\]. It made the whole task
impossible, absolutely impossible.

Anyhow, the next problems, as you could see, were beginning to emerge.

Shapiro: This incident we’ve been talking about was — can you give us a
rough year on that?

Orlans: I guess it must have been — since I left, I was fired, in 1987,
this must have been sort of ’85, ’86. I was speaking out, saying what I
thought about the ’85 amendments to the Animal Welfare Act. That
solidified the notion of where I stood on issues.

Shapiro: Okay. While I’m sort of interrupting you, is there any
relevance to the \[Edward\] Taub case to SCAW, or was that an important
event?

Orlans: Yes. It was discussed. There again, my views became very
evident.

Shapiro: Which was in ’81 or ’82. ’81, I think.

Orlans: 1981. That again indicated the level of division. In fact, one
of our board members was very sympathetic to Taub. I began to realize we
were getting into very deep trouble and we hadn’t got the right people.
This same fellow, Richard Simmonds, was sympathetic to Taub, whose
laboratory was raided, and he was very defensive about animal research.

It was his decision — and a very clever strategy, I think, on his part —
to revise the by-laws of the Scientists Center. That is well known in
organizational history to be an exceedingly divisive issue. The fighting
then got to be intense. Dick Simmonds was responsible for writing up the
drafts. They were so contrary to what I believed. I mean, some of them
were absolute nonsense, like the board is responsible for — and this is
an actual quote — that the board is responsible for the day-to-day
operations of the organization — just nonsense.

By this time — I don’t remember what year it was — but by this time,
when the by-law issue came up, we had got a little office in Bethesda
and I had got one person to work for me full-time. We were getting money
from the Dodge Foundation that kept us together. But the by-laws was
certainly a dividing line, because they omitted any mention of the Three
Rs and issues like that. I was warned by Jean Dodds and Dick Simmonds
about what I was saying.

Shapiro: Who was the first person you mentioned there?

Orlans: Jean Dodds, the vice president. Then we had a setup where,
again, we had made mistakes. We had appointed board members initially
without any term \[limits\]. We started trying to regularize this. That
was a real headache. At some point along the way, it was decided that I
should become the director and not be the president anymore. But this
caused a problem, an incredible problem, because Jean Dodds became
president, and we failed to appoint a vice president. These oversights
got to kill me in the end.

So at one very tense board meeting, it was obvious that the board were
not supporting me. We got in a consultant to help us with organizational
structure, and they didn’t do anything to help. They did recognize that
the board and I myself were not working on the same stream. Then we had
one very tense meeting where Jean was due to retire, to go off the
board, because her term of service was up. I don’t know what it was,
three or four years or whatever. She took everybody by absolute
surprise, saying that she intended to stay on for an extra year as
president. Well, since we hadn’t gotten a vice president, we were in
terribly bad shape. I had absolutely misjudged the whole thing in having
any faith in thinking that we would be able to move on to a different
president by just consensus. But it certainly didn’t happen. The whole
plan at that point was to get rid of me.

Shapiro: With Dodds included in that.

Orlans: Oh, a leader.

Shapiro: Was Andrew Rowan in there?

Orlans: Absolutely.

Shapiro: When did Rowan come in, do you know?

Orlans: He was around at that time, and certainly Jean Dodds, Dick
Simmonds, Dick Traystman, and Andrew Rowan wanted me fired. Other people
on the board went along. Harry Rowsell was my only firm supporter.

Shapiro: He was on the board also?

Orlans: Yes. He was a strong supporter.

Shapiro: Do you want to identify him?

Orlans: Harry Rowsell was the director, executive director I think the
term was, of the Canadian Council on Animal Care, a leader not only
nationally in Canada but internationally promoting animal welfare
issues. An absolutely wonderful man. He stayed true to the objectives of
the Scientists Center.

It was a total defeat, too many strong people numerically. I was ill at
the time that I was fired. I had just spent about a month in hospital.
It was a tough period. I had lost all of my intestinal flora, which can
be fatal. I was recovering and sitting in the garden here when I was
told that they had had a secret board meeting and fired me. One blow was
loss of income, which was severe for me. I never took very much salary
there, but I was dependent on it.

Shapiro: And you had been out of NIH for several years.

Orlans: Absolutely. And I had to support myself. So financially it was
an enormous blow and has continued to be an enormous blow for the rest
of my life because I lost a lot during those ten years that I was at
Scientists Center in terms of what I could have earned had I stayed at
NIH, for instance. Another blow was that as part of the negotiated
termination, I had to work for five months after I was fired. That was
exceedingly tough. I had to go on working and running the place with all
these people against me. The office administrator whom I had appointed
became the de facto director. I was supposed to basically report to her.
It was a total reversal of our positions. To say that it was awkward is
putting it mildly.

Jeremy Stone was terribly helpful and provided me with a lawyer, a pro
bono lawyer, to help me through the negotiations that went on with this.
Anyhow, I felt so defeated because really this organization had been
like a baby to me. It was my child. I had put in everything I had got to
make this succeed, and I could see it going off in a direction that I
didn’t agree with, with people whom I had learned did not pursue the
sorts of goals that I was wanting to pursue.

Of course, this has been played out now to extreme limits insofar as now
here we are in 2002, the Scientists Center for Animal Welfare has as a
president one of the major people from the National Association of
Biomedical Research, a person whom I would consider to be my bitter
enemy, Howard C. “Bud” Hughes. He is a person who is so absolutely at
the other extreme of everything that I believe. The organization has
gone to that level now. I’ve lost everything. To just see what you had
hoped for to go downhill to such an extreme, to go to absolutely the
other polarized extreme from what your ambition was.

Shapiro: How have you dealt with that?

Orlans: Stressful. What do you do? I did at one point go to visit Jean
Dodds a few years ago. I had lost touch with her. She had joined by that
time the Association of Veterinarians for Animal Rights and was being
quite active in that group. I thought I would go talk to her. I was in
Santa Monica where she lives. It was a total loss, that meeting. I was
trying to point out to her how terribly disappointed I was that the
organization had gone into such a reverse position from what I had
wanted and what I think at one time she had wanted, too. But the meeting
was a total failure. She wasn’t really interested in anything that I had
to say.

Shapiro: Did she agree with you?

Orlans: No. She didn’t really voice an opinion. It was more centered on
what she had done with her life, and that was the end of it. I was very
distressed at the end of that meeting. There wasn’t anything she could
do really, although she did have some affiliation still with the
Scientists Center on the advisory board or something like that. That’s
why I visited with her. Anyhow, it didn’t work, and we just have to take
it for what it is now. Whatever healing that that organization can ever
do to go up to where I would like to see it may take many years or
decades, if ever.

Shapiro: What you call a reversal, was that immediate upon your leaving
or do you see some evolution toward that position?

Orlans: It had been creeping up over the years. The fact that a board
member was going to the state legislature to testify strongly in favor
of seizing pound animals was evidence enough of how contrary the
thinking was. Of course, there had been indications. I’m sure I didn’t
catch all of the innuendoes of what was going on, because I was very
shocked when I was finally fired. I guess you don’t ever expect \[it\].
I don’t know that people ever really expect to be fired. Again, I had
been responsible initially in setting up the board structure. When I
became director, there was discussion as to what should be the authority
of the board. I had gone along happily with the notion that the board
would have the ability to fire and hire the director. I was fool enough
to feel assured with that.

Shapiro: I’m not an expert, but I think that is a prerogative of the
board. That’s required by statute.

Orlans: Yes, probably.

Shapiro: The board has a right to — you work at the discretion of the
board.

Orlans: But it never had occurred to me that I would be on the receiving
end of being fired. \[Laughter\].

Shapiro: Because you had been a founder.

Orlans: Yes. When you’re the founder and responsible for everything
starting up. But anyhow, it was an incredible blow. Again, I can only
compare it to a death of a baby. I really would put it as strongly as
that. Over the course of time that has been how I view the situation.

Shapiro: A powerful image.

Orlans: Are there other things you want to know about the Scientists
Center?

Shapiro: Why don’t we pause there and we’ll recoup.

Orlans: Okay.

\[End Tape 3, Side A; Begin Tape 3, Side B\]

Shapiro: We have been talking about SCAW. Barbara, you had a correction
that occurred to you in the break regarding the publisher of the
Dodds-Orlans Scientific Perspectives on Animal Welfare book \[correction
made in transcript\]. And that correction is that it’s —

Orlans: Academic.

Shapiro: — Academic Press rather than —

Orlans: Addison-Wesley is what I had said. There’s another little insert
on Jean Dodds, because I had done all the work of editing and
everything, but she said as president at that time, “I will be the first
editor of the book.” So I was downgraded at that point very
successfully, too. \[Laughter\]. Life’s tough.

Shapiro: With friends like that. Also during the break we determined
that we might want to go back and talk a little bit about the
development of the pain scales, if that’s what you call them. Do you
want to talk about that?

Orlans: Yes. It was in 1982 when this book, Scientific Perspectives on
Animal Welfare, was published. That was the first publication in the
United States to my knowledge of a harm scale for animals. It’s
variously called an invasiveness scale, a harm scale, a pain scale. But
the idea behind this concept is that there are gradations by which you
assess the invasiveness of an experiment from no pain and no distress to
the animal to mild, moderate, or severe.

This idea was brought to the Scientists Center for Animal Welfare by
Karl Johann Öbrink from Sweden, from the Department of Physiology of
Uppsala University. He gave a presentation. He wasn’t invited, actually.
We didn’t know about him, but he turned up at the 1981 conference and
then gave this talk on how the Swedes were assessing the degree of pain.
The Swedes at that time were tremendously in advance of every other
country as far as their animal legislation, laboratory animal
legislation. They had already established review committees on a
regional basis, similar to the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee. These were regional committees — not institutional — since
Sweden isn’t a very highly populated country. These committees were
composed of one-third animal researchers, one-third animal technicians
from the laboratories, and one-third public members — a revolutionary
notion to have technicians and public members so well represented.

Anyhow, he spoke about the Swedish pain scale and its use, successful
use, of getting the investigators to assess the degree of potential harm
to the animal before they sent in their proposal for review to these
regional committees. This was the first country to ever do such a thing.
The regional committees then reassessed their opinion as to how much
harm they thought the animals were subjected to, and they had the
ability to modify that. It was quickly learned, not only in Sweden but
in other countries later on, that investigators habitually underestimate
the degree of harm. But they would correct it and then assess the
justification for the experiment in terms of what is the likely value of
this work and scientific merit of it as opposed to the amount of harm
that you’re doing to the animal.

It’s a very important concept that has grown in value and in application
worldwide now. Currently there are eight countries that use this pain
scale system. Sweden, strangely enough, has stopped using it. But Canada
was close on the heels of Sweden for adopting this. Canada, because of
Harry Rowsell, was always in the forefront of reforms. Then other
countries — the UK a few years ago adopted it. The Netherlands have had
it for quite a long time — Switzerland and Finland and New Zealand. So
it’s now become quite a good idea, a workable system.

So when the Scientists Center published this pain scale, it seemed to me
an exceedingly attractive idea and something that we should grab hold of
and try to promote as an idea for use in the United States. So what I
did was to use Öbrink’s Swedish scale as the basis for everything. That
was the whole idea for it. I prepared a scale with a bit of
modification, not much, and examples. I think we included some examples
of applications of what would fit in each category. The Netherlands
followed up on that with a very good system with a lot of examples
given.

I sent a draft pain scale around to all of the individual and
institutional members of the Scientists Center for comment and
concurrence. I don’t remember how many people there were that I sent it
out to. It was in the hundreds at least, because I would not only use
the members, come to think of it. If it was 1982, we couldn’t have had
all that many members. I must have used lists of veterinarians from
other professional veterinary associations to get names for who I
thought ought to have some say, the \[American\] Physiological Society
and that sort of thing. Well, it wasn’t an exactly resoundingly,
numerically speaking, a strong response, but it was good support.
Richard Murphy, who was a physiologist at the University of Virginia,
was then a board member. He was very helpful indeed. He started using it
at his university.

I then started collecting information as to what other institutions in
the United States would adopt \[it\]. We started promoting this whole
idea. I collected information and published it in the newsletter of the
Scientists Center and elsewhere. Yes, come to think of it, I did an
article for the Journal of Investigative Radiology. I listed out all the
names of the American institutions that were actively using this pain
scale for assessment of their investigator’s work before review. Of
course, I published as much stuff as I could on this whole issue. I was
terribly keen on the idea.

Well, that story has a sad history over the long-term, even though
Andrew Rowan took up the issue in 1996. He put together a group of
people who would try to work it up to propose formally to the United
States Department of Agriculture as a policy to be adopted under the
Animal Welfare Act. It never worked. Andrew, who certainly had quite a
bit of talent, to say the least, and organizational skills never managed
to get any sort of support from the biomedical community.

People volunteered to work in this group. It was people like you, Ken
Shapiro, Martin Stephens. I don’t remember the names of the people, but
it was maybe half a dozen or so people who were all from the animal
welfare movement. Somebody from ILAR \[Institute of Laboratory Animal
Resources\] would come. Oh, yes, Ralph Dell used to come to throw, shall
I say, a wet blanket on everything. It was never going to go anywhere,
and Andrew realized — we all realized that this was a dying project, so
it faded.

However, in other countries the story is very much more rosy. I do
believe very strongly that this is a proposal that ought to be
considered very much by all countries as a mechanism, a very good
mechanism, for alerting and educating the scientists themselves as to
what they’re doing to their animals. Use of a pain scale makes them
recognize animal pain and assess what’s the level of harm that they are
causing, and then in turn to get the reviewers involved in trying to fit
the procedures into these sorts of scales. There’s a tremendous amount
of learning that goes on. You may not get concurrence from one
institution to another as to exactly how they would categorize any
particular project or procedure, experimental procedure, because there
are a lot of influencing factors such as the skill of the investigator
and all sorts of ins and outs of the procedure itself. But the overall
concept, I think, is an extremely sound one.

Shapiro: I was involved in that in ‘96, ‘97, ‘98. What is your opinion
then of the current — there is a sort of categorization in the current
US regs. Is it of no value?

Orlans: No value.

Shapiro: No value?

Orlans: It used to be a value when it first came in. The current system
requires you to say whether you used an anesthetic or not or whether
there is no pain whatsoever. When it came in — it must have been in
probably early 70s or so — the anesthetics were not used when they
should have been. So to draw attention to that fact and make
investigators think, “Should I use an anesthetic or not at this time?”
was exceedingly valuable. However, it’s totally outgrown its usefulness
now because the veterinary profession, in particular, were responsive.
People like Frank Loew, for instance, were at the forefront in urging
veterinarians and investigators to see that decent anesthetics and
post-operative care was provided. Quite a revolution took place because
the abuses of the past — really many of them were corrected. I do think
that on the whole anesthetics are used now when needed. We have got to a
different level of maturity now in our thinking. You need something
other than ticking off a check mark saying, yes, I used an anesthetic.

Shapiro: Okay. We’ve filled that in. Let’s go to the post-SCAW years
then more directly. So there you were unemployed.

Orlans: Yes, indeed. So what do you do? You spend months being
devastated, and you realize you’ve got to pick up the pieces and do
something. It was pretty clear to me straight away what I intended to
do. I had got such a lot of experience over that last ten years in
running the organization. I knew I wanted to write a book. I had a lot
to say. I had written a book years before on the use of animals in
education actually. I had written a book on what sorts of animals to
keep in high schools and kindergarten classrooms. I thought that that
was a good way to promulgate your views.

Shapiro: What was the name of that first book?

Orlans: It was called Animal Care: From Protozoa to Small Mammals.\[11\]
That went through all the different species that were good for keeping
in the classroom and omitting species, of course, that were not good to
keep in classrooms, like birds. I’m totally opposed to keeping caged
birds anyhow. The concept behind was that you only keep in the
classrooms animals whose natural habitats you could replicate with ease,
animals that don’t mind noisy classrooms and that particular temperature
and environment that you can give them, and food that’s available —
animals that would be very easy to look after.

Anyhow, so then In the Name of Science came about.\[12\] I had this real
boost, not only emotionally but intellectually, when I applied for a
grant to write this book. I did this straight after being fired. I don’t
know where I got the idea from, but I applied to the Rockefeller
Foundation for a very prestigious setup where you go to a — well, it’s a
villa like a palace in Bellagio in Italy. \[Laughter\]. You’ve got six
weeks residency there in this sort of ten-star hotel with an
international set. There were about twenty of us at a time who came in
on weekly shifts. Actually, some of the people who were there were some
of the brilliant intellectuals in the world. I mean, it was incredible
that I got that going through all right.

I went with my husband Herb. We had the most wonderful time. Leon Edel,
the biographer of Henry James, was there. The people you met were just
fantastic, not to mention all the wonderful setup, these wonderful
gardens with wisterias all in bloom at the time I was there and the
lake. It’s just an incredibly beautiful place. So that was very
restorative.

I had got to the point then when I had got the outline of the book. I
just needed to write, so I sat all day and wrote. I worked very hard
when I was there and started doing the chapters. It was certainly very
beneficial. I was proud, obviously, to have been accepted. You needed to
have recommendations who would support your application. I used with
success, evidently, two of the board members from the Scientists Center
who — I guess they may have thought that they owed me something
\[laughter\] and that’s why I got some good write-ups from Richard
Murphy from the University of Virginia and Andrew Rowan. So I have that
to thank them for.

But also I must have started some contact with the Kennedy Institute of
Ethics over that period, because Tom Beauchamp, who later came to be a
colleague and co-author with me — he was very instrumental in helping me
with that book. When I told him about it, what I was doing, he, who is a
well-published, massively-published author in philosophy — he phoned up
Oxford University Press and suggested that they look at my manuscript.
So that set that up. I got a contract with Oxford University Press, and
that set me going for the next three or four years I think I spent
writing it. It was a long, long effort.

Shapiro: What was the initial image or intent of the book? What was it
supposed to do?

Orlans: It was to put into words what I had hoped the Scientists Center
would achieve or help to achieve — reform in the way the animals were
looked after; reform in the legislation; pursuit of the Three Rs of
refinement, reduction, and replacement; of greater awareness and
sensitivity among the investigators; better review procedures; better
review of what gets published in the journals that should take a
responsibility to not publish stuff that is traumatic to the animals
without mentioning the efforts to alleviate animal pain and distress and
all the thinking that should go behind planning an experiment to do this
in the least traumatic manner.

It was enormous fun. It got to be quite obsessive. I think writing any
book tends to be obsessive. You live it everyday. My husband was writing
a book at the same time, and we had a great time together, one at each
end of the house. We’d just meet for breakfast and meet for dinner and
read over each other’s chapters and so on. It got to be a very, very
happy period.

Then came the time for submitting the final copy. I had expressed my
views, as always, very openly and had been very outspoken in what I
thought was wrong and what I thought should be the policies. This was
mainly concerned really, I think, with public policy issues.

Shapiro: In the US.

Orlans: In the US, right. The publisher’s review process went all very
nicely. Oxford has a set procedure, obviously, of sending it out to
readers. I understood that the whole process was complete, that the
manuscript was totally accepted. Then came a bombshell. The person I was
dealing with was Jeff House at the New York office of Oxford. He deals
with all the philosophy books actually and a number of fields, including
neuroscience.

Anyhow, he attended a conference of neuroscientists on the lookout for
likely manuscripts for Oxford to publish. He must have got into
conversation with someone about my book, and this fellow asked to see
it. This was absolutely at what I considered to be the twelfth hour the
book had been accepted for publication that Jeff House sent it to this
neuroscientist. He recommended that it should be reviewed by Frankie
Trull, who is the president, I think is her term, for the National
Association of Biomedical Research — my enemies. So it went to Frankie
Trull, who wrote back. I remember the letter. They sent it on to me —
Oxford. The first sentence was that “this is not a scholarly book.”
\[Laughter\]. So then she went on to tear it to pieces, saying that it
was absolutely unpublishable and Oxford shouldn’t be doing anything like
that — just hopeless, just stop the press and stop the works.

Shapiro: But she didn’t critique exclusively the positions. She took the
line that it was just not academic enough.

Orlans: “It was not scholarly” was her first sentence. I recall that. I
don’t really remember clearly her arguments, but it was just a document
trying to destroy any prospects I had of publishing with them.

Shapiro: Is Trull a degreed scientist?

Orlans: No. She’s a very savvy politician. So then I got this phone call
from Oxford saying, “Oh, I’m sorry. We can’t publish your book. We’ve
had this review, and you’ve got to make major changes.” So then Oxford
started making suggestions for changes, which would be, for instance — I
can’t remember the exact issue on debate, but I do remember the overall
picture. I would argue for one side of a particular issue. Let’s take
the position of pound animals just as an example. My way of presentation
was to give both sides of a controversy and then end up saying why I
supported one particular side. The whole intent was to be fair and to
really represent the viewpoints of the contesting parties.

So there was this one chapter, I remember, where I presented one side,
the anti-animal welfare side and then the welfare side, and then made
some conclusion. The manuscript came back stopping at the end of the
anti-animal welfare side. \[Laughter\]. This went on through all of the
chapters. I was desperate because I had spent four years on this book.
This was going to be my life’s work, my second baby.

Anyhow, we had to reach some compromise. I was faced with the
possibility of moving to another publisher obviously. I felt I couldn’t
do that. Oxford is a very prestigious publisher. I wanted to be
published by Oxford. I had thought that I was right at the end of the
production line. It takes a long time to get a contract with a
publisher, certainly if you’re not a well-known author. So I decided I
had to stick with it. I remember some anguished discussions with
Christine Stevens over this period. She tried to help me resolve to the
issue.

It ended up with me watering down just about everything in every
chapter, just about everything. By the time it came out, I couldn’t care
less about the book. It was not saying what I wanted, although it was
still obvious, I think, to the readers that it was animal welfare
oriented. I did get some quite nice reviews actually. It was quite well
reviewed, but it was not what I had wanted it to be — a revolutionary
document. I had my sights set much, much higher for what sort of impact
it might have.

Shapiro: What impact do you think it has had in its present form?

Orlans: Oh, I don’t think it has much impact. It’s still in print nine
years later, which is fairly good going for a book. Books come and go
usually in a couple of years or so. But I had had good success with the
first book, the animal care book. That’s still in print after about
twenty-five or thirty years, I think. I still get royalties on it,
amazingly. So I just take it in my stride now. It was not what I wanted,
but it’s there, part of history.

Shapiro: And you continued on.

Orlans: When I finished the book, I really wanted to get some
affiliation. It’s very difficult when you’re trying to be an activist
and you’ve just got a home address to use and no title. I thought it
would be very good at Georgetown University. I had had some contacts
with Edmund Pellegrino, a noted bio-ethicist, and LeRoy Walters, a
similarly world-renowned bio-ethicist, and Tom Beauchamp, whom I’ve
mentioned before. I thought there was a nucleus there of sympathetic
attitudes, coming especially from Tom Beauchamp. He was terrific.

So I went to see Pellegrino and Tom to ask was there any position I
could get there. Indeed, thanks to Tom, I did get an appointment there.
That kept me exceedingly happy. I’ve been there now for ten or twelve
years, I guess. I’ve done a bit of teaching there in the philosophy
department on animal issues, over in the medical school, not a lot. I
only once developed a course on human and animal experimentation for the
med school. But it has been more odd lectures here and there, but it did
give me an address, which I needed. I continued to write articles. It
was a good solid base. If you say, “I’m from Georgetown University,”
it’s okay when you go lobbying on the Hill for including the rats, mice,
and birds and that sort of thing. It’s certainly a plus. So this has all
worked out exceedingly well, and this period of my life has certainly
been peaceful, constructive, I think, and very satisfying.

Shapiro: You got interested in ethics through this position. Do you want
to tell us a little bit about your thinking about ethics issues in
animal research?

Orlans: Well, yes. At the Kennedy Institute of Ethics I am surrounded by
philosophers and bio-ethicists. I was the odd man out. I was the only
person who was a scientist. We have an occasional lawyer, we have
several priests, because it’s a Roman Catholic institution. We had a
most wonderful series of weekly seminars that were very instructive for
me on all sorts of bio-ethical issues.

I began to realize that this was a field that needed to be developed for
animals. There wasn’t any teaching, hardly any teaching, in any of the
med schools, for instance, on anything to do with ethical issues
regarding animals. There were hardly any courses in any university —
maybe a dozen nationwide in the United States, which is virtually
nothing, a little speck of sand, on animal ethics. I started taking an
interest in this at the Scientists Center, and I used to collect
information on the courses that were available and publicized them and
write up little bits about who was doing the teaching and what the
courses included and so on, because I occasionally get requests from
students who were searching for undergraduate courses on animal ethics.
I didn’t know where to send them at first. So then I could compile a
little list, not very much. But this was a field I reckoned ought to be
developed.

I learned something from all these wonderful philosophers. After all, it
was the philosophers who had been instrumental in laying the foundation
of the animal rights movement. I checked into whether philosophers had
been involved with the anti-slavery movement, and they weren’t. It’s
pretty well unique. You use that word unique cautiously, but it’s
certainly very rare for philosophers to have taken a leading role in
social reform the way it’s happened with the animal rights movement.

So I got to be friendly with the animal rights philosophers, and that
was all very nice. Tom Beauchamp and I started to work together, which
was terrific. The whole idea of trying to work out some of the analyses,
ethical analyses, that you might want to work on in deciding the rights
and wrongs of the human use of animals came to be very intriguing. After
doing that one book, In the Name of Science, Tom and I decided we would
do a case study book, because case studies are a very good way of
teaching many subjects. It’s a very standard way of teaching law,
certainly business ethics — and all sorts of bio-ethics depend on case
studies.

So David Morton, a fine veterinarian from England who had been at the
forefront of European reforms on animal experimentation, and Rebecca
Dresser, a lawyer, a good friend from Case Western University who had
been prominent in writing from a legal perspective about animal welfare
issues — the four of us got together, and later we added John Gluck from
the University of New Mexico, a psychologist. We put together this book
— again, a very happy period — to write up case studies of abuses of
animals and try to make an ethical analysis of each case. I think that
was quite a good book. It needs a revised edition. I wish somebody had
already taken up the idea and started writing up case studies on animal
issues, but nobody has yet. I’m hoping that they will.

Shapiro: That book came out when? A few years ago?

Orlans: 1998.\[13\] At several of our meetings — it was the four of us
together, Rebecca Dresser and David and Tom and myself — we tried to get
at some fundamental overview of how to ethically analyze the human use
of animals. We failed. We decided we couldn’t do it, but we did try.

Shapiro: You were looking for some overarching frame.

Orlans: Yes, that’s right. You know, there are various ethical
principles that you can develop of human subject research and so on. We
tried, but we never really got anywhere, not to say that it can’t be
done. Some overarching words carrying an ethical message have been
introduced into the legislation of some countries. For instance,
recently in the Netherlands a new, higher ethical standard has been
established by stating that animals have “intrinsic value.” These words,
now included in their national law, afford a higher moral status for
animals than previously. As another example, in the US, a 1985 amendment
to the Animal Welfare Act states that the “psychological well-being of
primates” must be attended to. These few words have had a powerful
effect in raising the living standards for laboratory primates by
enriching their environments.

Shapiro: I’m curious. In this effort to develop an overriding or
organizing theme for all the case studies, you apparently didn’t find
the extant ethical theories — Regan, Singer, et cetera — adequate?

Orlans: I don’t know quite what we were expected to be able to come up
with. Obviously, Regan and Singer made very good contributions, but I
think we wanted to take things a bit further and to be able to be rather
universal in what precepts we were going to put forward. David, in
particular, was very keen on us trying to pursue this, but we didn’t
think that we could add anything more to what had already been said. We
had thought we might do a chapter just on ethical analysis. On the
case-by-case studies you can pick up some of what our intent was.

Shapiro: Just to be clear, you’re not saying that you rejected Regan’s
notion of rights or Singer’s notion of interest or sentience.

Orlans: No.

Shapiro: But that you didn’t find them — you couldn’t add to that, or
you didn’t find them applicable on a concrete level.

Orlans: That was the problem. You try to get the universal notion that
you could establish that would apply everywhere. There are so many
diverse ways in which humans can abuse animals that it’s extraordinarily
difficult to try to put it all into one bag. Somebody will come up with
it. I hope so. It’s worth pursuing.

Shapiro: So in some ways the case study approach is instead of a grand
theory.

Orlans: Yes.

Shapiro: How do you feel about the impact of that book?

Orlans: It has had reasonably good sales for a book of this kind. It is
being used in some courses. I don’t think we were shrewd enough
necessarily in being able to pick out pedagogically useful cases. Tom
Beauchamp is very good at that. He’s done a lot in this field of case
studies in bio-ethics, and the selection of cases is very important. It
needs somebody to follow on now with other books like this, illustrating
many different aspects of mistreatment of animals, because some of the
chapters are not — I can see now — are not useful in a class. Yet the
whole purpose of the book was really that it should be able to be used
as a text.

Shapiro: In an undergraduate ethics course?

Orlans: Either way, graduate or undergraduate. It could go either way.

Shapiro: But ethics courses?

Orlans: Yes. Well, yes, animal ethics, sure. Or you could use it, I
think, more broadly. You remember philosophers have all sorts of courses
on social issues.

Shapiro: It wouldn’t be used in a veterinary curriculum or a medical
curriculum or a physiology curriculum.

Orlans: Well, ideally, yes. Some of the ones on animal experimentation,
yes. There is room for a lot more books like that to be able to get over
this idea of being able to be useful to students.

Shapiro: We have a few more moments in this segment, I think. We can
discuss — save the next segment for sort of some views of the movement.
What else do we need to fill in here? Are there other projects that came
in these years associated with the Kennedy Institute?

Orlans: The rats and mice is certainly an issue I’ve worked on for
several years.

Shapiro: The inclusion issue?

Orlans: Yes, including the rats and mice and birds in the legislation.

Shapiro: These conferences that you’ve put on —

Orlans: During my time at the institute — oh, yes, I had forgotten all
about this. I started in ’91 with a conference, the Ethics of Animal
Experimentation. I think that’s probably what it was called. Following
on from my experience with conferences from the Scientists Center, it
was natural for me to continue in this vein. Indeed I have. I have put
on now probably about six or seven over the last decade, conferences on
a similar theme. The first two were at Georgetown University. We got a
hundred, a hundred and fifty people to come, and quite a lot of interest
from abroad. The idea would be to look at the obligations \[and\]
responsibilities of human beings to animals, to look at philosophical
analyses.

We would invite Tom Regan. Tom Beauchamp got to be quite a fine
contributor on this issue of the moral standing of animals. Raymond G.
Frey, another philosopher. And Carl Cohen, the person who would come
with his message that animals have no rights. He was right in the camp
of all the people who want to maintain the status quo. I remember we
only invited him once, and I remember when he came he told me how he was
currently writing a book against feminism, so that delighted me.
\[Laughter\]. Anyhow, we’ve had lots of good times with these
conferences.

At one point, we were very concerned to try to write up a course
curriculum as a model for an animal ethics course. It really floundered.
We started on it, and John Gluck and David Morton and Rebecca Dresser
and Tom Beauchamp were all involved in this. But we didn’t come out with
any product, but I hope that our courses may have stimulated some people
to introduce this sort of material about the human use of animals into
their courses of all sorts of multidisciplinary courses. People came
from — faculty members came from all sorts of \[fields\] — sociology,
psychology, and so on. It’s a topic that can fit into many, many areas.

This last one, last spring, was on the great apes. It was more
successful numerically and financially than any other conference we had
ever put together. We did it with Tufts University, because recently
after the first two at Georgetown we started that same pattern of going
around to different universities and collaborating with them. But we had
about two hundred and fifty \[or\] three hundred people come. It was a
big success. We had a most stellar cast of speakers, including Jane
Goodall, of course, who made the whole thing. She was there for the
whole two and a half days, which is pretty remarkable. So that was a
good stimulus.

I think that the conference was successful in creating a network of
people who would keep in touch with each other after the conference, of
getting people to know each other who were working on different species
of animals within that group of great apes. There is a lot of
fragmentation of interests. I was happy we ended on a good note, because
I’m not going to do another one now.

Shapiro: Not going to do another one?

Orlans: No, that’s it. But I don’t know — I hope we’ll get a publication
out of that, too. We’ll see.

Shapiro: Do you want to take a break?

Orlans: Okay.

\[End Tape 3, Side B; Begin Tape 4, Side A\]

Shapiro: We’ve left this time to talk about some general views that you
have about the movement, the issues, where they come from, tactics,
strategies, the future of the movement, your views of this whole area
based on your thirty years or so.

Orlans: Is it thirty or forty? Forty years. I got involved in the early
1960s or maybe even late 50s. Late 50s probably. It’s a long time
anyhow, a long time.

They’ve been terrific. To have been involved with this sort of life, I
often think how well blessed I am that I have had this — able to have
this satisfaction of working for a cause. I think people who don’t have
a social cause really are missing out on an awful lot of life. It keeps
you going.

Shapiro: I agree with you. Definitely.

Orlans: So with all the ups and downs, the rewards are terrific. You
could look back and say, “Yes, I’ve done my best, and I haven’t maybe
achieved anywhere near what I would have liked to have done, but I’ve
tried.” And it’s been fascinating to be involved with the people,
especially with all of the wonderful friends you make, with the people
who share your views. It’s a good way to live.

So as far as looking back on the movement, it’s been clear throughout
what I’ve said, I think, how influential Christine Stevens has been to
me. She has really been a life model for me for her approach, her
careful collection of data, never exaggerating, telling the truth,
working for legislation, all of these admirable features, of being
really very hard-hitting. She’s fantastic when she gives testimony on
the Hill. It’s a wonderful heritage she leaves, and I’ve certainly felt
myself to be a disciple of hers and very much inspired by everything she
does. You don’t come across great people like that all that often. She’s
unique in my life certainly.

Her tactics have been incredibly successful — get the information,
document what the abuses are, come up with good ideas for how to solve
them, looking always to legislation and oversight. I think those are key
to how you effect any reforms.

As for other tactics, I’ve certainly looked very kindly on People for
the Ethical Treatment of Animals \[PETA\] for what they have done with
all their incredible raids during the 1980s — bang, bang, bang, one
after another. They were shattering. I feel very kindly towards them
because I don’t think we would have had the reforms as quickly as we did
have without their very belligerent tactics. But I think they worked
hard. They trained hard for how to do these raids. They had a mentality
that was very tough to be able to take the route they did. It’s not fun
to take that road when you know you’re going to be so severely
criticized and your work and your revelations just disputed and you’re
told you’re a liar and that sort of response that you get from the
public. It’s a tough world, but they did a good job.

Shapiro: Okay. I have a point of clarification. You used the word raids.
What do you mean by that?

Orlans: Well, these were the laboratory raids when they would go in
incognito, sometimes falsely identifying themselves when they would get
a job. The Animal Liberation Front really was working in league with the
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.

Shapiro: So you’re not talking about break-ins. You’re talking about —

Orlans: Yes, break-ins, too.

Shapiro: PETA taking responsibility for break-ins?

Orlans: Yes. I thought that they — at that time, it was worth what they
did. I mean, Alex Pacheco, who took that job at the Institute for
Behavioral Research in order to get that job with the macaques, which
you ended up with the Silver Spring monkeys case. Then there was the
University of Pennsylvania baboon head injury study where the ALF
\[Animal Liberation Front\] members actually broke into the facilities.

Shapiro: But they weren’t officially in any way connected with PETA —
ALF.

Orlans: Officially not, no. No, but they needed PETA. It was a pretty
good strong liaison, however you want to word it. But that information
that they got — the self-incriminating evidence they got from the
University of Pennsylvania was key, in my opinion, to the 1985
amendments to the Animal Welfare Act, which were the best amendments,
the most influential amendments probably of all time.

So on the whole I could not criticize, at that time and place, what they
did. You can’t continue with that sort of strategy, but it was jolly
effective at the time. Conditions were exceedingly bad and it needed all
the legislation that it got to help to reform it. No, I wouldn’t, in
general, say, “Go in and steal stuff, crash stuff, and so on, and try to
let out the animals into the wild,” which is really pretty stupid, I
think. But overall that would be my impression. I’m glad they’re
finished now and there are other tactics that are better and well used.
Basically, it’s a very basic one. You get your evidence. You collect
your evidence. You do your homework. You find out what it is you’ve got
to complain about, and you’ve got to make a case for yourself to get
public sympathy on what you’re criticizing.

Shapiro: You see PETA as following that strategy at this time.

Orlans: Well, they’ve made plenty of mistakes. I was really just
speaking about their involvement in helping to publicize the raids. No,
I think they’re too strong beyond what I would want to follow.

Shapiro: In terms of goals or tactics?

Orlans: No, in terms of tactics. I think they’re too aggressive. I don’t
know precisely where they would stop. But on the whole, I think they’ve
had a good influence, and they’ve certainly made an international name
for themselves. On the whole, the outcome has been positive, I would
say. I would prefer that they existed than not exist.

I think I’m happy to see the coalitions that emerged. They have been
tremendously important. Henry Spira, of course, was the key person in
starting off with those. It must have been early 80s the coalition on
the LD-50 and the Draize tests, getting a whole lot of people, different
organizations, to agree to a goal and then working together on it.
That’s what’s happening now on the rats, mice, and birds. I go to a lot
of the meetings of the Working Group to Preserve the Animal Welfare Act.
We have monthly meetings. I don’t go to all of them. There are
representatives from all of the major, or nearly all of the major humane
organizations. It’s a good feeling, good cooperation, very constructive
atmosphere, unity in goals and collaboration in all the lobbying
efforts. It’s a tremendous effort to put all that stuff together. The
Working Group’s leaders there are doing a very, very good job. I think
that’s a strategy that could be used.

Shapiro: Coalition strategy.

Orlans: Absolutely.

Shapiro: Is the great ape situation — is that a similar strategy?

Orlans: I think it was a good attempt. I don’t think that the Great Ape
Project is really getting very far. They’ve got a publication of a book,
and they’ve got a number of cells all over the place. But I don’t
frankly know that I’ve seen very much impact.

Shapiro: What is your feeling about the Chimpanzee Sanctuary
Rehabilitation Act?

Orlans: I’m not too familiar with that, Ken, actually. I don’t think I’m
very good at being able to discuss that.

Shapiro: Okay. There’s a number of perennial arguments. I just wonder if
you want to weigh in on any of them, like the welfare versus rights
issue?

Orlans: Again, I don’t think I have an awful lot to say on that issue.
I’ve certainly found myself in the position of pursuing — of thinking of
myself, identifying myself certainly during the formative years of the
Scientists Center as a welfarist, because at that time I had to curb a
lot of what my feelings and intellectual leanings were in order to try
to do the work I was doing, and that is work right within the scientific
community. You can’t step too far out of line. As it was, I stepped too
far out of line and got into trouble.

As I’ve gotten older, I’ve certainly moved more and more toward stronger
views, more strongly held views, for animal rights. I find myself very
happily talking about animal rights now and would relieve myself of the
modifications and constrictions that an animal welfare viewpoint puts on
you. I think there is far more to the moral standing of animals that you
need to think about that really put you onto a level where you have to
be able to accept that animals do have rights in their own standing,
that they’re not just creatures at our disposal to do what we want for
what we think is human benefit or sort of human exploitation for some
monetary gain or whatever. But the regard for animals should be set on a
moral standing basis.

Tom Beauchamp has been influential on me in this respect, of course,
where he has worked on this issue a lot. He’s done very good work
arguing that moral standing is a continuum, that moral standing isn’t —
it’s not just human beings that are moral, but the morality of live
organisms extends well into the animal kingdom beyond our species. It’s
a continuum that there are grades of moral standing. It’s ridiculous to
think of it as an all or nothing type of situation, that humans are the
only living creatures with moral standing.

Shapiro: I do have one or two philosophical kind of questions. In your
own thinking, what kind of attributes does a being have to have in order
to have moral considerability, to have moral status?

Orlans: Attributes include intending, suffering, having desires,
preferences, and other psychological capacities, such as ability to have
some form of communication, having a range of expression of emotions.
Some animals certainly have a sense of beneficence and the ability to be
able to foresee, to be able to work out problems, and so on, this type
of abstract thinking which some animals do have.

Shapiro: So this is a standard that’s higher than simple sentience?

Orlans: Absolutely. No, I think that it takes it a bit further.
Sentience is very useful and has served a great purpose for decades now.
It’s fairly comprehensible. If you accept Singer’s cutoff point of the
mollusks, these are all quite nice and neatly classified into groups so
that you don’t have to worry so much about the insects, but you do worry
a lot about the crabs and how you kill them and so on. But I think that
this refines the arguments to go into moral standing. I think it’s an
addition to our thinking.

Shapiro: You’re not concerned that it raises the barrier so that fewer
animals are protected.

Orlans: I don’t think it’s fewer animals are protected. It means that
some animals are given even greater standing than other ones, but you’re
not cutting off at the bottom at all. I mean, because still you worry
about your lobsters and your shellfish. So they’re still in. I would
include the insects, too. When you begin to get into a view of all of
the organisms, you don’t want to draw lines. There are lines drawn for
certain specific purposes, but when you take a holistic view of nature,
you get into a whole different realm of what is your relationship to
that.

Shapiro: So if you do get into a — do you think about an ecosystem as
having some integrity? Are you a deep ecologist?

Orlans: No, I’m not. I’ve really not gone into that field. I’m very glad
that a lot of thinking goes on in that field, but it’s not one that I
have been drawn to. I’m sympathetic, certainly very sympathetic, to a
lot of that ecology stuff.

Shapiro: What’s your sense of who the major players are recently and
currently in terms of all those issues in the movement?

Orlans: In the United States or internationally?

Shapiro: Internationally, sure.

Orlans: Well, there are certainly these wonderful leaders in Europe who
have managed to be so successful with the European Union and the
directives and so on that have come out where they are really the
leaders in the world. From Utrecht —

Shapiro: \[Bert\] Van Zutphen?

Orlans: Yes. To get me to name a lot of names, it’s not going to be a
fluent discourse. \[Laughter\]. Obviously, David Morton, Paul Flecknell,
and other great leaders in Europe. Australia and New Zealand have been
doing terribly well. David J. Mellor and others there are just first
rate contributions. In Africa — there’s nothing much going on there. F.
W. de Klerk in South Africa is doing his best. Aline S. de Aluja.
\[Leopoldo\] Estol in Argentina is a fine veterinarian. He’s really
doing his best on laboratory animals down there. Tony James out in Hong
Kong. There are these people scattered around. They’re doing their very
best.

In the United States I would look — I haven’t kept up with the people in
the biomedical community this last decade. I’m getting out of
circulation in terms of the meetings I go to. So I can’t name the
outstanding veterinarians now, which I could have done at one time.

But certainly within the animal protection movement you’ve certainly got
outstanding people. Christine Stevens always. Andrew Rowan does his bit
despite criticisms of his organization, which are unfortunately all too
well-grounded. Criticisms of the HSUS include various bits of corruption
and financial shenanigans. They give you pause as to the organization as
a whole. Tina Nelson, I think, from the American Anti-Vivisection
Society certainly is a very good person. John McArdle — I think these
are people who are doing a good job to move things along. Cathy Liss, of
course, is exceptional at the Animal Welfare Institute. You don’t get
much out of the Mass. SPCA now. There are individuals there who do their
bit quite well, but I wouldn’t call them national figures, frankly.
Nothing else really leaps \[out\].

Shapiro: Okay. Let’s go back to HSUS, because your view there is mixed
at best in terms of them as an important organization.

Orlans: Well, they’re too glossy. They’ve got too much money that they
don’t spend on animal welfare issues. They put out too many glossy
publications and don’t do things, even when they’ve got a good
publication, for instance, like Jonathan Balcombe’s book, which is a
hundred and twenty pages, something like that, on the use of animals in
education and alternatives. It came out a couple of years ago. They put
a twenty dollar price tag on. That’s a nonsensical way of trying to do
any good. Teachers — high school teachers, college teachers — they don’t
have the money to put out. They’re not going to spend twenty dollars on
a little slim book. They’re probably don’t even want to spend three or
five dollars. You’ve got to give them away.

That’s always been the policy of the Animal Welfare Institute for all
their educational publications to be free of charge. Their first
groundbreaking publication was “Comfortable Quarters,” which was the
equivalent to some of the work that Universities Federation for Animal
Welfare have done.

Shapiro: Viktor Reinhardt.

Orlans: Well, he is a recent staff person at the AWI. But “Comfortable
Quarters” go back a long way, back probably to the 60s. They were the
first organization in the United States to put out any information for
scientists and laboratory animal workers as to how to look after your
animals in any reasonable way, to get architectural drawings for how to
build comfortable quarters for various species. It was very important
work. They’ve continued that. But they give away everything — their
Humane Biology Projects, their book in probably the 70s or something
like that on suggested projects for science fairs. It’s all given away.
You’ve got to do it that way. That’s what I think HSUS ought to do and
not keep feeding their already too deep pockets.

Shapiro: This is sort of a corporate critique that you’re offering.

Orlans: Absolutely. I think the high wages are obscenely high payments
to their executives.

Shapiro: Your view then is that a smaller organization, like AWI, that
isn’t playing the corporate game can be more effective?

Orlans: As a matter of fact, yes, they are. But that it has to be so, I
don’t know. I think that you could, should be able to get even in large
organizations, multi-million-dollar organizations, that ought to be able
to run an ethical shop. I don’t see that it’s impossible.

Shapiro: It’s not the concept of the bigness itself. It’s that you feel
it’s just too fat.

Orlans: It’s too fat. It certainly would help to have a breakaway group
from them again now. They broke away, of course, some years ago — 50s I
guess — from the American Humane Association. But breaking away is quite
a good idea at some point, just people who really want to see work done,
not to make money. That’s the decision, that’s the dividing line, as far
as HSUS is concerned, in my view.

Shapiro: What about the achievements? How would you characterize the
achievements in the movement? You’ve commented some on the achievements
in the laboratory animal area. What about more general? In your thirty
or forty years, what have we gained, what have the animals gained?

Orlans: What in general — for all animals, you’re talking about?

Shapiro: Yes.

Orlans: Are you trying to say who is responsible for those gains? Or
just what’s happened?

Shapiro: No. An assessment of the gains. What are those gains?

Orlans: Well, the big change is in attitude, public attitudes. That’s
been fed by all sorts of streams — the philosophers, PETA, the raids,
and a general good will among the responsible scientists.

Scientific contributions have also made a tremendously valuable gain for
the animals in terms of all the animal behaviorists — Jane Goodall, Marc
Bekoff, and so on — who contribute to our understanding of how animals
work, what their minds are like, how they behave, how they play, how
they have maternal instincts just like us, and language and so on. All
of these major contributions to an understanding of the non-human world
have influenced people to be sympathetic to animals. Look at all the
worldwide attention to when the chimpanzees were first found to put a
bit of straw or a twig down a hole to pull up an ant. That made
headlines in the newspaper. Nobody had thought of tool-using as anything
other than a human capability. Most of us have expanded our view of the
capacities and the intricacies and wonder of the animal kingdom.

You’ve got to go back again to \[Charles\] Darwin, who is still very
much alive in people’s thinkings in terms of the view of the natural
world. It’s amazing how often people go back to Darwin in terms of their
own views of the different species of animals and plants. But this last
fifty years or so is a major change. I think people are much more
sympathetic all around.

So I think the public attitudes — that, after all, is the basic material
with which you’ve got to work in terms of getting any practical reforms.
The legislation and all the good people who fought for improved
legislation have also been tremendously important. The legislation I’ve
come over time to think of as more important than anything else. You’ve
got to have it down on paper. You’ve got to have it down as a consensus
of what the government will work with in order to step forward and
improve what you’re doing for the animals. I think that’s basically
about it.

Shapiro: Do you want to say a word about prospects?

Orlans: I long to get the rats, mice, and birds in. That’s my
hope.\[14\]

Shapiro: Do you think that’s likely next year?

Orlans: Give them another decade.

Shapiro: Really?

Orlans: Yes. I don’t think it’s going to happen this year. I met with
the new USDA chap. USDA doesn’t have a good record of jumping in on new
issues, although I think their heart is in the right place on this. They
do an awful lot of foot-dragging historically. You look at the primate
issue, psychological well-being — was it nine years before they came out
with any rule-making after it had obviously become the law? In the
government you can waste an awful lot of years. I certainly wouldn’t say
this year, but it will come. It’s got to come sooner or later.

I think another big issue, of course, is the Animal Care and Use
Committees. You’re still struggling so much in bio-ethics with the
institutional review boards, the human research experimentation and
treatment of patients. It’s a terrible mess with the IRBs. Anything you
look at — the treatment of the research on the mentally ill, the
transplantation of organs, using live donors for livers and so on. The
review standards are still far from adequate. They’ll never be perfect.
Perfection doesn’t exist in this field.

But you can certainly improve the review process, making it less rubber
stamp, bringing in more viewpoints. In animal review committees, there’s
still a great paucity of input from the humane movement and from the
public, the non-scientists. The animal protection movement ought to be
in this, that, and the other place. They should be members of the
Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources. They should have
representation at NIH on various committees and so on and various
government agencies.

Some countries — England and Sweden and the Netherlands and New Zealand
and Australia — have done much better in that respect. They’ve got their
RSPCAs and so on in quite prominent positions, advisory groups to the
government on animal welfare laws and that sort of thing. That’s what we
need. We’re a million miles away from that in this country, a million
miles. You couldn’t even dream of it at this point.

As far as the professional scientific organizations are concerned — the
\[American\] Physiological Society, the American Psychological
Association, and neuroscience groups, and all these other disciplines of
the experimental animal groups — they never do anything but say, “Let’s
oppose this suggested reform legislation on animal welfare.” That’s all
their memberships ever get. They don’t organize conference sessions on
how to be an animal care and use committee member, or address the pain
scale issue or the assessment of harms in animals. They don’t provide
any training on procedural methods that could refine the experiment and
procedures, statistical analysis of experiments that could cut down on
the numbers of animals used or make the experiment that more definitive,
and so on. All the Three Rs are still in meager viewpoint, I should say,
within the biomedical community in this country.

You need training. That’s still a far-off goal, to get decent training
of the investigators before they’re allowed to touch an animal. There’s
supposed to be training now as per the ’85 amendments, but it’s in-house
so that the people who are going to do surgery on animals are supposed
to have had a bit of training in how to do it. But, boy, is there a long
way to go.

You look at the prime examples of the Netherlands and the UK now, where
in the Netherlands, for instance, you have a three-week — it could be
two. I think it’s three though — mandatory course for all investigators
on humane techniques. They have to take this full-time three-week thing
on how to — anesthetic methods, euthanasia methods, designs of
experiments, the Three Rs, all sorts of relevant issues, what the law
is. There is a tremendous amount of content to be covered. In fact, you
could certainly say that three weeks isn’t enough. You could want far
more. But the fact that such courses don’t even exist in this country is
certainly an area where you have to have a lot of movement. I don’t
think anybody is working on that.

When you look at the animal protection movement, there are a lot of
these issues that are not addressed. HSUS does have their animal pain
and distress campaign, which is very good. I fully support it. They
didn’t realize how hard it was to get investigators to even accept the
fact that the stress existed or that there’s such a word as animal
suffering.

Shapiro: Some parts of the movement, like IDA \[In Defense of Animals\]
and groups like that, are doing campaigns that are jumping ahead of what
you’re talking about. What’s your view of that?

Orlans: I should have mentioned IDA, because I think they’re admirable.
I don’t follow their work really all that carefully. The AVAR
\[Association of Veterinarians for Animal Rights\] are doing terrific
work. I should have certainly put them in the top category of being
influential nationally. I think that the IDA group have got a fine set
of people. They’re pretty aggressive and they get what they — again,
they follow the proper path and they get the data, they get the
information, they’re solid on their facts.

Shapiro: They’re trying to basically stop certain procedures or stop
certain investigators?

Orlans: Yes. I think that’s a very legitimate thing to do, very
legitimate. I think that if you can single out a particular procedure,
experiment procedure, that is exceedingly troubling and go after it — I
mean, that’s what Henry Spira did with the LD-50. You keep after it
until you get it eliminated. Tina Nelson has done good work, of course,
on that with the —

Shapiro: Antibody.

Orlans: Thank you. \[Laughter\]. Monoclonal antibodies is what I’m
looking for. What I’d hope, sometime in the very far distant future I’m
afraid it will have to be, will be something such as the Canadians have
started and done fairly well at, of putting out — it isn’t widespread
enough, the Canadian venture. But the idea is that you put out standard
operating procedures for a particular procedure, experimental methods.
The Canadians started with Freud’s Adjuvant, a very controversial area
that caused a tremendous lot of pain for the rabbits, who could hardly
walk. Their feet were so inflamed because they were being injected with
this substance that was excruciating. And to work on particularly
problematical procedures. You’re working really towards getting rid of
them altogether.

But you do your best by trying to hone down exactly how you should go
about doing any one of these things. You give specific instructions, and
they can be nationally accepted procedures. You would have to have a
consensus to have any clout on these things. I don’t know where this
sort of movement would come from. Unfortunately, it doesn’t come from
the biomedical community. It doesn’t come from the veterinary community.
It doesn’t come from the humane organizations. The Canadian Council is
unique in being able to pursue these sorts of goals. They’ve got a whole
body of very humane-minded investigators who are prepared to say that
certain psychological procedures on animals of both severe deprivation
or prolonged water deprivation or other social deprivation or these
sorts of things — what barriers, what constraints you’re going to put
around these procedures if you allow them at all. This sort of thing —
it’s a wide open field.

Shapiro: The HSUS pain and distress campaign seems to have that, kind of
going after one procedure at a time.

Orlans: I think they’ll make some impact over the course of time.

Shapiro: So when you think twenty-five years ahead you don’t see any
dramatic change really. You don’t have the abolitionist image.

Orlans: I would have abolition image for the chimpanzees. I would have
hopes for abolition for all non-human primates. That’s as far as I can
see right now. But you’ve got a few people, not many, but a few people
protesting about any primate experiments, and that’s good. This is
coming from the humane movement, that group —

Shapiro: The Primate Freedom Campaign.

Orlans: Yes. Well, that’s one. There’s this other, the group of previous
animal technicians who worked in primate facilities, Laboratory Primate
Advocacy Group. They’ve got stringently set goals for abolition. That’s
ten or twenty people, something like that. They’re just beginning. So
there’s a terrific growth potential in the whole primate field. I don’t
know if you’re going to get somewhere with getting more dogs and cats
out of the laboratories.

Shapiro: By omission I gather you don’t have great hopes for the kind of
strategy that Steve Wise and Gray Francione are using with respect to
court definitions of “person” and standing in the courts.

Orlans: I think the law courts have a very important role to play. They
certainly have in the past. No, there is a potential there, and good
luck to them. We need more lawyers involved in being able to pursue
these goals. The whole legal process is so arduous anyhow, but you need
one or two really good cases. You have the Taub case. Certainly that hit
the headlines, and that was very, very influential. But you need at
least one a decade to make an impact.

Shapiro: The Taub case didn’t change the way in which the courts think
about animals.

Orlans: No. But it got enough publicity so people learned about the
abuse of these animals. That was the good outcome, even though the court
case was, in fact, a failure, because he was exonerated in the end. But
that happens to everybody — Nixon and the whole — \[Laughter\].
Everybody.

Shapiro: We’re about to wind up. Are there any other thoughts you want
to \[put down\]?

Orlans: No, not really. I’ve enjoyed your questions and comments, and
it’s been easy to respond, because I think you’re doing a nice job of
setting the scene.

Shapiro: Thank you. It’s been a pleasure.

\[End of Session\].

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

Academic Press 33, 43

Addison-Wesley 43

Aluja, Aline S. de 57

American Anti-Vivisection Society (AAVS) 57

American Humane Association 58

American Medical Association (AMA) 24

American Physiological Society 44, 60

American Psychological Association 60

American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (ASPET)
19

American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) 28

Animal Care: From Protozoa to Small Mammals 46

animal experimentation and testing 10–12, 15–16, 18–21, 22–29, 32,
36–37, 43–45, 46–48, 54–55, 59–63

Animal Liberation Front (ALF) 54

animal rights movement/animal protection community 53–55, 57–63

Animal Welfare Act 39, 44, 50, 54

Animal Welfare Institute 19, 20, 22–24, 26, 34, 36, 57, 58

Argentina 57

Association of Veterinarians for Animal Rights (AVAR) 41, 61

Australia 57, 60

Axelrod, Julius 17

Balcombe, Jonathan 58

Beary, Bianca 34

Beary, John 34

Beauchamp, Tom 46, 48–52, 56

Bekoff, Marc 59

birds 25–26

Blair, Tony 13

Bobby \[dog\] 2, 3, 7

Brodie, Bernard 17, 18

Cafferata, Gwen \[sister\] 6, 7, 16

California

Santa Monica 41

campaigning/lobbying 20–21, 55

Canada 41, 44

Canadian Council on Animal Care 41, 62

Case Western University 50

Chicago Tribune 26

children and animals 22–29, 36–37

Chimpanzee Sanctuary Rehabilitation Act 55

civil rights 29–30

Clark, Joseph S. 20

Cohen, Carl 52

Comfortable Quarters \[publication\] 58

Concern for Helping Animals in Israel (CHAI) 28

Cromie, Bob 26

Cruelty to Animals Act (Britain)11

Darwin, Charles 59

de Klerk, F. W. 57

Dell, Ralph 45

Dodds, Jean 36, 38, 40, 41, 43

dogs 2–3

Dresser, Rebecca 50, 52

Dyce, Dorothy 22, 23

Edel, Leon 46

education 22–29, 36–37, 49–52, 58

England See Great Britain

Estol, Leopolod 57

ethics and morality 49–52, 55–56

European Union 57

Evans, Oliver 24

Federation of American Scientists 31

Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) 19, 20

feminism 29–30

Finland 44

Flecknell, Paul 57

Florida 36

Fox, Michael W. 32, 34

France

Paris 14, 16

Francione, Gary 62

Frey, Raymond G. 52

funding/finance 32–33, 35–36, 58

Georgetown University 48, 49, 52

Kennedy Institute of Ethics 46, 49, 51

Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation 36, 40

Gloekler, Emily 36

Gluck, John 50, 52

Goodall, Jane 52, 59

Great Ape Project 55

Great Britain 10, 11, 17, 20, 21, 31, 44, 50, 60, 61

Birmingham 1, 3–5, 8, 9, 12, 13, 16, 17

London 1, 2, 9, 12–14, 16, 17

Moseley 1

Stratford-on-Avon 7

Harris, Frank 14

Hong Kong 57

House, Jeff 47

Hughes, Christopher \[father\] 1, 3–9, 12, 16

Hughes, Flora \[mother\] 1, 3–6, 16

Hughes, Hilda Lindsey \[stepmother\] 3, 5, 9, 16

Hughes, Howard C. "Bud" 41

Humane Information Services (HIS) 36

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 24, 34, 57, 58, 61, 62

Hume, Charles 31

In Defense of Animals (IDA) 61

In the Name of Science 46, 49

Institute for Behavioral Research 54

Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources (ILAR) 45, 60

International Science and Engineering Fair 24, 25, 27

Italy

Bellagio 46

James, Henry 46

James, Tony 57

Johns Hopkins University 17, 32, 34

Journal of Investigative Radiology 44

Kleiman, Devra G. 37

Koop, C. Everett 24

laboratory animals 18, 54–55, 58, 62

Laboratory Primate Advocacy Group (LPAG) 62

law and legislation 20–21, 59–60

Liss, Cathy 57

Loew, Frank 20, 31, 45

London Hospital 9, 12

Lowe, Sylvia \[sister\] 6, 16

Magnuson, Warren D. 20

Malone, Thomas 32

managing an organization 31–42

Maryland 38

Baltimore 17, 32

Bethesda 1, 29, 37, 40

Montgomery County 22

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)
27, 57

Mayo Clinic 17

McArdle, John 57

McDowell, Robert 15

McVay, Scott 36

media 26

medicine/medical community 20–21, 22–29, 34–35, 60–61

Mellor, David J. 57

Montaigne, Michel de 14

Morton, David B. 50, 52, 57

Murphy, Richard 44, 46

Myers, Fred 36

Natelson, Nina 28

National Academy of Sciences 20

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 23

National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS) \[Chicago\] 27

National Association for Biomedical Research (NABR) 24, 32, 34, 41, 47

National Association of Biology Teachers 27, 37

National Cancer Society 23

National Dairy Council 23

National Institutes of Health (NIH) 17–19, 21, 23, 27, 28, 32, 35, 39,
41, 60

National Science Teachers Association 37, 39

National Society for Medical Research (NSMR) 20, 24, 25, 28, 32

National Zoological Park (Washington, DC) 37

Nelson, Tina 57, 61

Netherlands 44, 50, 60, 61

New York 24

Albany 37

New York City 47

New York Times 26

New Zealand 44, 57, 60

Öbrink, Karl Johann 43, 44

Oxford University 5

Oxford University Press 46–48

Pacheco, Alex 54

Pellegrino, Edmund 48, 49

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 53, 54, 59

Primate Freedom Campaign 62

primates 52–53, 54, 62

monkeys 24, 27

psychological aspects 41–42, 53

Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PsyETA) 1

rabbits 22–23

Regan, Tom 34, 50, 52

Reinhardt, Viktor 58

religion 4, 9

Rockefeller Foundation 36, 46

rodents 22–23, 51, 59

mice 28

Rowan, Andrew N. 33, 38, 40, 44–46, 57

Rowsell, Harry 40, 41, 44

Schaeffer, William Donald 17

Schwartz, Leon 32

Science Service 24, 25

science/scientific community 17–18, 22–29, 59, 60–61

Scientific Perspectives on Animal Welfare 33, 43

Scientists Center for Animal Welfare (SCAW) 31–42, 43–47, 49, 52, 55

Shapiro, Kenneth 44

Silver Spring monkeys 54

Simmonds, Richard C. 37, 39, 40

Singer, Peter 34, 50, 56

South Africa 57

Sparkes, Peggy \[sister\] 4, 6, 16

Spira, Henry 55, 61

Stephens, Martin 44

Stevens, Christine 19–24, 26, 28, 30–32, 34, 38, 48, 53, 57

Stone, Jeremy J. 31, 34, 41

Strandberg, John D. 34

Sweden 43, 44, 60

Switzerland 44

Taub, Edward 39, 62

Topper \[dog\] 2, 13

Traystman, Richard J. 34, 40

Trull, Frankie 47

Tufts University 31, 52

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 44, 60

Universities Federation of Animal Welfare (UFAW) 31, 33, 58

University of Birmingham (England) 2, 5

University of Chicago 34

University of London 14, 17

University of Michigan 19

University of New Mexico 50

University of Pennsylvania 54

University of Southern California 33

University of Texas at Austin 25

University of Virginia 44, 46

Uppsala University 43

Van Zutphen, Bert 57

vegetarianism 7–8

veterinary medicine 45

Virginia

Richmond 25

Visscher, Maurice B. 32

Wall Street Journal 32

Walters, LeRoy 48

Washington Humane Society 34

Washington, DC 17, 19, 25, 28, 32, 33, 36

Westinghouse Science Talent Search 25, 26

Willy \[guinea pig\] 1

Wise, Steven 62

Working Group to Preserve the Animal Welfare Act 55

World War I 4

World War II 7, 16

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[1\] The Cruelty to Animals Act of 1876 is concerned mainly with the
use of animals in research.

\[2\] See attached articles from the Animal Welfare Institute’s
Information Report.

\[3\] See attachments; selected articles from the Animal Welfare
Institute’s Information Report: 1970, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1-2, “Cruelty
Eliminated at 1970 Westinghouse Science Talent Search”; 1970, vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 1-2, “Amateur Monkey Surgery Continues Unabated”; 1972, vol.
21, no. 3, pp. 1-2, “High School Students Continue Cruel Experiments.”

\[4\] This is the lobbying group for the biomedical community and
forerunner of today’s National Association for Biomedical Research.

\[5\] See attachment, Information Report, vol. 17, no. 2, (Washington,
DC: Animal Welfare Institute, 1968): 1-3.

\[6\] C. Everett Koop, Koop: The Memoirs of America’s Family Doctor (New
York: Random House, 1991).

\[7\] See attachment, “Teenage Prizewinners,” Information Report, vol.
18, no. 2, (Washington, DC: Animal Welfare Institute, 1969): 2.

\[8\] See attachment, Information Report, vol. 18, no. 2, (Washington,
DC: Animal Welfare Institute, 1969): 1.

\[9\] FAS Public Interest Report, Special Issue: Animal Rights, vol. 3,
(Washington, DC: Federation of American Scientists, 1977): 1-8.

\[10\] W. J. Dodds and F. B. Orlans, eds., Scientific Perspectives on
Animal Welfare (New York: Academic Press, 1982).

\[11\] F. Barbara Orlans, Animal Care: From Protozoa to Small Mammals
(Columbus, Ohio: Pearson Learning, 1997). See www.pearsonlearning.com.

\[12\] F. Barbara Orlans, In the Name of Science: Issues in Responsible
Animal Experimentation (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).

\[13\] F. Barbara Orlans et al., The Human Use of Animals: Case Studies
in Ethical Choice (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998).

\[14\] On May 14, 2002, President George W. Bush signed into law that
rats, mice, and birds would be permanently excluded from the Animal
Welfare Act. We lost that battle.
