---
---

This edited transcript is the product of tape-recorded interviews
conducted by

Charles Hardy with Tom Regan in Raleigh, North Carolina,

on October 12, 2000, and September 29, 2001,

for the non-profit group Recording Animal Advocacy

TAPES AND INTERVIEW RECORDS

The original tape recordings of the interview, edited transcript, and
records pertaining to the interview are deposited permanently at
Columbia University’s Oral History Research Office.

Note: The original recording was made on DAT tapes. However, the
transcript was from audio cassettes copied from the DAT tapes. Therefore
tape breaks indicated in the transcript refer to those in the audio
cassettes (not the DAT tapes). Both DAT and audio tapes are deposited at
Columbia University.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 – October 12, 2000

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

Reaction to recently announced federal guidelines on inclusion of
rodents in Animal Welfare Act – Raised in a blue-collar family;
circumstances that led to attending college and majoring in philosophy;
interesting incident while at graduate school in University of Virginia
– As an anti \[Vietnam\]-war activist in the early 1970s, read Gandhi’s
works and found it impossible to reconcile meat-eating with opposition
to unnecessary violence – Arguments used in “The Moral Basis of
Vegetarianism”; publishing the article in Canadian Journal of Philosophy
– Peter Singer: Singer’s famous review in the 1973 New York Review of
Books; meeting Singer in Oxford in 1973; collaborating with Singer on
Animal Rights and Human Obligations – Response from the philosophy
profession in the 1970s to TR’s writings on animal rights and to applied
philosophy in general – Greatly influenced by Helen Jones’ views on
animal experimentation; no serious involvement with animal organizations
in the 1970s.

Note: no Tape 1, Side B

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

The Case for Animal Rights (1983): receiving NEH (National Endowment for
the Humanities) grant to write the book; different from Singer’s Animal
Liberation because it places animal rights within the context of all
major moral theories rather than being an exposé; areas covered by the
book include “lexical gap,” animal psychology and consciousness; became
clear in the course of writing that animal rights cannot be overridden
because of human benefit; the extraordinary excitement in and
preoccupation with writing the book.

\[Tape 2, Side B\] . . . . .

More on The Case for Animal Rights: the book not only has practical
implications regarding personal choices but is also a critique of social
structures and institutions; much critical response from peers; at first
upset at the book’s not having the same impact as that received by
Animal Liberation – Animal organizations and animal protection efforts
in America before the 1980s were “reformist” rather than “abolitionist”
– Meeting founders of PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals)
in 1983; PETA’s video of Thomas Generelli’s primate experiments –
Detailed description of experience at the 1985 sit-in at the NIH
(National Institutes of Health) to stop funding for Generelli;
successful application of Ghandian principles.

\[Tape 3, Side A\] . . . . .

More on NIH sit-in – PETA’s approach to getting media attention and its
merchandizing activities; inappropriate use of civil disobedience by
animal groups in the post-NIH sit-in period – Meeting Robert Nozick who
reviewed The Case for Animal Rights; helping animal organizations and
giving speeches, but later realized that efforts had little influence –
Concentrating on academic work; importance of donating personal papers
to university library – The concept of “subject of a life” which
combines the strength of Kantian and utilitarian philosophical
traditions.

\[Tape 3, Side B\] . . . . . 32

Humans and animals are still not liberated – Being a vegan; vegan food –
Difficulties with remaining in the animal rights movement for long and
with sustaining friendships with fellow activists.

Session 2 – September 29, 2001

\[Tape 4, Side A\] . . . . .

Writing books in mid-1980s on the philosopher G. E. Moore – “March for
Animal Rights”: discussing the idea of the first March (held in 1990)
with others and serving as co-chair of the organizing committee; the
March did not bring about unity in the animal rights movement as hoped;
unhappy with and not actively participating in second March (held in
1996) – Approaching the religious community: producing the video “We are
All Noah” with assistance from the university’s media service;
involvement with international conference in the U.K. on religious
perspectives on the use of animals in science; the religious community’s
refusal to change their attitudes towards animals – Reasons for forming
the Culture and Animals Foundation (in 1985); its goals and activities –
Details on organizing the first March and role as co-chair.

\[Tape 4, Side B\] . . . . .

More on organizing the first March – Memories of the day of the March
and speaking in front of tens of thousands of people – Serving as head
of philosophy department for five years and initiating significant
curriculum changes at the college – Thoughts on “ethical displacement” –
Speaking engagements: encountering objections (mainly from scientists)
at various campuses for a short period; funny experience at Emory
University; appearing on Ireland’s “Late Late Show”; the importance of
delivering the animal rights message in such a way that even those who
do not agree with it would respect the way it is delivered and not
dismiss the messenger; contributing to the movement by presenting animal
rights to outsiders through talks (instead of playing the role of a
unifying force for the movement).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[Tape 5, Side A\] . . . . .

Differences between Europe and America in matters such as the
availability of vegetarian food, treatment of farm animals, money and
politics – Thoughts on pacifism, on evil in this world (which is done by
all), on recent realization that in the past his studies were made on
“the object of wrong done, not the subject who was doing it” – Direction
of the animal rights movement: media still only look to Singer, Regan,
PETA; need to create opportunity for young people; after 1990 the
movement was “cheapened” and lost its momentum and “moral compass.”

\[Tape 5, Side B\] . . . . .

A few final wrapping up words.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

October 12, 2000

Raleigh, North Carolina – Tom Regan’s office

Session of 2-3/4 hour

September 29, 2001

Raleigh, North Carolina – Tom Regan’s office

Session of 2 hours

Interviewer:

Charles Hardy (Professor, Department of History, West Chester
University; oral historian)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Tom Regan. Carmen Lee checked the
edited transcript, added footnotes, prepared the index and introductory
material except the “Biographical sketch” which was provided by Regan.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Tom Regan is Emeritus Professor of Philosophy, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina (USA). During his more than thirty
years on the faculty, he received numerous awards for excellence in
undergraduate and graduate teaching; was named University Alumni
Distinguished Professor; published hundreds of professional papers and
more than twenty books; won major international awards for film writing
and direction; and presented hundreds of lectures throughout the United
States and abroad. In 2000, he received the William Quarles Holliday
Medal, the highest honor NC State University can bestow on one of its
faculty.

Among his books, two (The Case for Animal Rights and Bloomsbury’s
Prophet: G. E. Moore and the Development of his Moral Philosophy) were
nominated for the Pulitzer Prize and the National Book Award.

The Case for Animal Rights was immediately recognized as a “modern
classic” when it first appeared in 1983. Already translated into
Italian, Swedish, and Dutch, The Case for Animal Rights will be issued
in a German edition in 2002.

Other of Tom Regan’s books that touch on the topic of animal rights are
All That Dwell Therein: Essays on Animal Rights and Environmental Ethics
(1982); Animal Sacrifices: Religious Perspectives on the Use of Animals
in Science (1986), The Struggle for Animal Rights (1987), The Thee
Generation: Reflections on the Coming Revolution (1991), Defending
Animal Rights (2001) and (with Carl Cohen) The Animal Rights Debate
(2001). He is universally recognized as the intellectual leader of the
animal rights movement.

For its part, Bloomsbury’s Prophet has helped reenergize and redirect
Moorean scholarship in particular and the study of early twentieth
century British philosophy in general. In addition to Bloomsbury’s
Prophet, Tom Regan’s other major contributions to Moorean scholarship
are Moore: The Early Essays (1987) and G. E. Moore: The Elements of
Ethics (1991). He is co-founder and past president of the Moore Society.

Tom Regan’s major film awards include the Silver Medal for We Are All
Noah (International Film Festival of New York, 1986) and the Gold Medal
for Voices I Have Heard (Houston International Film Festival, 1988).

Tom Regan is married to the former Nancy Tirk, with whom he co-founded
The Culture & Animals Foundation. They have two wonderful children, a
son, Bryan, who is a photographer living in Raleigh, and a daughter,
Karen, a lawyer who lives in Washington, D.C..

\[The above biography was provided by Tom Regan, with very slight
modification by Carmen Lee.\]

Tom Regan

Session \#1

October 12, 2000

Raleigh, North Carolina

Charles Hardy, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Hardy: Let’s see what we can get done today, and we’ll take a
traditional oral history approach: start at the beginning and work our
way forward. But before we do that, what I’d like to do just to get
started is ask you about your thoughts about the new federal guidelines
on the use of rats and mice in laboratory experiments.

Regan: As you know, the Animal Welfare Act was originally passed in
1966. So it’s been out there for thirty-four years. It’s been amended
several times. It covers the care and treatment of animals in a general
way and it gives the USDA \[United States Department of Agriculture\]
authority to assure the well being of animals in laboratory experiments
when you’re receiving federal funds.

And it’s often said by the vivisection industry that 98-99 percent of
the animals used in research are rats and other rodents. And I think
that plays into a certain set of unspoken prejudices that the public at
large has about rats and other rodents because they think of these
little creatures invading your house and eating children and those sorts
of things. But of course, I mean, the laboratory rat bears no
resemblance to the street rats, shall we say. But the point is people
think, “Oh well, 98-99 percent.”

But what people usually don’t realize is that rats and other rodents and
birds are explicitly excluded from coverage of the Animal Welfare Act.
Rats aren’t animals, birds aren’t animals, and so it’s just kind of —
you can make any word mean anything you want to. Various organizations
have challenged this over the years, and just a few days ago USDA
announced that it was about to reach some kind of accommodation and
actually include rats, other rodents, birds. But that was immediately
challenged.

In fact, two days later Congress came forward and blocked that move and
so right now we’re back to square one, shall we say; we’re not going
forward with anything. And it does show that, if one never doubted it,
the power of special interest — science — when it comes to any kind of
real concern about the care and treatment of animals. Basically what
they’re saying is that would be prohibitively expensive. They would have
to do paper work for these animals that they don’t have to do because
they’re excluded, they’re not covered by the regulations, and this would
be money much better spent on advancing science and so on. I think we
haven’t seen the end of it, but it does demonstrate very clearly, I
think, how powerful the vivisection industry is.

Hardy: For a philosopher, of all of the myriad topics and subjects that
you can study, why animal rights?

Regan: I didn’t set out to study animal rights. And, of course, I
haven’t limited my studies to animal rights. But it certainly has been
the central focus of my work. I didn’t set out to be a philosopher. I
came from, was raised in a blue-collar family. My mother and father went
to the seventh and the eighth grade. The only book we had in our house
was a Bible. I never in my life saw either my mother or father or my
sister actually read a book. We just didn’t have a library, although now
that I think back on it, they did buy a set of encyclopedias at one
point. I remember we had that. But we were not an educated family, a
reading family. And when I was in high school, I didn’t think about
going to college because no one in my family had ever gone, and the only
reason I did go to college was because my friends were going to go to
college.

When I was about, I guess about sixteen years old, my family moved from
Pittsburgh, the real city — this neighborhood no longer exists. It’s all
boarded up and plowed under now. We moved from there to about twelve
miles out into the suburbs. That move changed my life, and at least for
the following reason. When we moved out there, my peers, my high school
friends, many of them came from professional families. There were
lawyers and people that worked for the Pittsburgh Press, wrote for the
Press, teachers, people in business. It was very different than the mill
and mineworkers that I was familiar with. Those kids were going to go to
college because their parents had gone to college, so I just got on the
train, so to speak, and decided I’d go to college.

I wanted to become a writer. My high school teachers thought I was a
pretty good writer and I thought it would be wonderful to become J. D.
Salinger or Thomas Wolfe or somebody like that. When I was in college, I
didn’t succeed very well as a writer. My English teachers didn’t think
much of my writing, many of them anyhow. And to major in English, which
was what I was majoring in, you had to take a lot of history. You had to
take English history, American history, Pennsylvania history, all kinds
of history. I didn’t like history at all. They introduced a philosophy
major during my junior year, second semester of my junior year. For the
first time you could major in philosophy. I looked at that and saw that
you weren’t required to take any history to be a philosophy major. So I
became a philosophy major. And that really is how I became a
philosopher. I mean, they made me take too much history in English.

Hardy: Let’s see, our philosophy majors — I think they do have to take
at least one, only one, I think, in the Gen. Ed. Requirement. You don’t
see many philosopher majors anymore. \[Laughter\].

Regan: Well, it was a great relief to me. So I went off to college and
got through college, and at the end of college, I thought, well, I’d try
to find a job. It seemed about time. I think my parents were expecting
me to go to work because they had made a lot of sacrifices to make it
possible for me to go to school. I can remember interviewing for several
jobs. I interviewed with H. J. Heinz, the pickle and baked beans folks,
and it was just such a farcical episode in my life. It really was a
round peg in a square hole. I mean, it was just ridiculous. I was pretty
desperate. I didn’t know what I could do as a philosophy major.

It occurred to me that I might go to graduate school. And I applied to
graduate school at the last minute. I talked to my tutor, my professor,
and he encouraged me to do so. I was admitted, as I recall, in July,
with the semester starting in September. I was admitted at the
University of Virginia conditionally. That is, I had to prove that I was
worthy of becoming a permanent candidate for an advanced degree there,
because my grades were checkered grades in college — very, very
undistinguished during the first two and a half years, and then the last
year and a half, I mean, they were virtually straight A’s as I recall,
but it was pretty spotty to begin with. So they wanted some reassurance
that I’d be okay.

So off to graduate school I went and I was pleased to be able to satisfy
them that I was able to do the work. But it was always — it was very
backward. When I was at the university there were several students who
were very, very smart who were in my class. Two of them had gone through
the great books tradition at St. John’s College and they were conversant
in Greek and Latin. We’d come and talk \[in\] a Plato seminar and we’d
discuss Plato and, I mean, they were going back to the Greek texts and
translating. I was very intimidated by these people.

I remember very clearly during that first semester after one of these
seminars in Plato, I was walking across the grounds of the university
with one of these St. John’s chaps who had this little tweed jacket and
smoked his pipe and all that. I had asked the question, one of the first
times that I asked a question during my graduate life, during the
seminar. I explained why I thought Plato was confused. And well, this
fellow said that he thought my insight was beyond rebuke. I mean, it was
just so — such a symptom of shallow understanding and ignorance and ill
preparation and so on, and he turned to me and puffed on his pipe and
said, “Regan, you strike me as a man to whom it will be not difficult to
say goodbye at the end of this semester.” And here I am, just a working
class, blue-collar guy. I’m not a particularly vengeful person, but I
must say I was very pleased that he never made it through the program.
\[Laughter\].

Hardy: I guess UVA \[University of Virginia\] was quite a
status-conscious place in the early 60s.

Regan: Yes, it was! Yes. When I was there, you had to wear a coat and
tie, and women were not permitted in classes except during the summer.
It was a gentlemen’s university. So very much a Mr. Jefferson’s Virginia
gentleman. That’s what we were. Very, very status conscious.

So I go through there, and I come out of the program, and I’ve written
just the kind of ordinary stuff that you would do as a philosopher at
that time and in those circumstances. I was trained in what was called
the “analytic tradition.” The importance was clarity and argument and
rigor and nuance, that kind of stuff; it wasn’t like phenomenology of
experience or anything. It was at a different level altogether. My work
was of that kind.

What happened for both my wife and myself was that the war came along,
the Vietnam War, and that just — we just changed, we became activists.
Not in a great national sense; I mean, I wouldn’t want to mislead people
there, but we did work to help end the war. We organized with other
people a statewide grassroots organization called North Carolinians
Against the War. We just thought it was a tragic mistake and that the
sooner we could just get out of there the better.

As a consequence of that, I thought, geez, I ought to be able to use my
philosophical training to contribute something to the discussion about
the war, although this was not anything that I’d ever done remotely as
either as an undergraduate or a graduate student in philosophy. I just
never did any thing like that. Nothing applied. It was all analytical
and theoretical. So I started reading in what’s called “Just War Theory”
— under what conditions is a war justified. I started reading on the
nature of violence and aggression, Konrad Lorenz, and other people who
had theories of human aggression: whether it was biologically rooted,
whether we couldn’t help being aggressive, violent animals, that kind of
thing.

And the next thing you know is, I took down — I was reading some
\[Mahatma Mohandâs\] Gandhi, and that was where my animal rights stuff
really does begin. It takes that long in my life. Late twenties by the
time this happens. Because Gandhi “spoke to me from the pages of words,”
is the way I put it. People sometimes think Gandhi was sitting next to
me. I don’t mean to suggest he was in the room with me. It was like he
spoke to me from the page. He said, “Look, Professor Regan, it looks to
me like you’re really upset about this war.” And I said, “Yes.” “And it
looks like you’re really upset because you think there’s all this
unnecessary violence, this violation of ahimsa, the violation of the
principle against harming.” \[1\] “Yes, yes, I do. I’m really upset by
that.” And then it was like he said, “Well, what are all those dead body
parts doing in your freezer?” “What? I mean, what?” “I mean, look: there
are these products of violence in your freezer. They’re called animals.
They’re called steaks and chops and chicken breasts and whatever. The
point is that these are living beings, once living beings, that have
been violently killed. You’re suppose to be against unnecessary violence
and you don’t need this stuff. So what’s the deal, Professor Regan?” And
I really couldn’t answer. I mean, once the question became clear to me,
I couldn’t answer it, if you know what I mean.

Hardy: But how did this question become clear to you? Do you remember
when it actually — this sort of insight took place?

Regan: I don’t know, I can’t — I guess I don’t remember that there was
some particular moment, so much as it — that, it was more, more like,
you just \[pause\] realized. But it wasn’t a “Eureka” moment, like that,
it wasn’t an “aha” moment. It was just — it became clear. It was clear.
And so, I mean, what you do, as I say — now \[it\] reminds me, when I
was growing up and trying to help put myself through college, I worked
as a butcher. I didn’t have any trouble slicing and dicing and mincing
and grinding up the meat or anything. It was — they were just nothing to
me, it meant nothing to me. Or if anything it meant something positive.
My parents, as I said, were working class people. They survived the
Depression, and they never got out of the Depression. Mentally,
psychologically, they never left that. They are always — they could
never spend money happily. They were always pinching and saving. So for
them, the one thing that they really did indulge, where they would
indulge themselves was, they ate well for them, which means they ate a
lot of meat, which means that’s how I grew up. It was a real symbol of
success for my father and my mother. They could eat what they could only
dream of eating during the Depression. And they could feed that to their
children. So I grew up, a meat and potatoes person, and happy about it.

So, when you become clear, when the question becomes clear, you say, “I
mean, how do you reconcile this?” \[Laughter\]. And of course, you
can’t. I mean, I don’t think you logically can. Psychologically you can
play lots of games like, “You must really need the protein” or it would
“hurt my mother’s feelings.” You can play all kinds of psychological
games. But logically, there really is no way of avoiding the following:
that if you are opposed to unnecessary violence in the world, which any
reasonably decent person, I think, must be opposed to, then you can’t
eat animals. Not in this world as it is right now. I guess you could
imagine some circumstances — if your plane crashed in the Andes and you
needed to survive or something like that — you could tell some story
there. But we’re not in the Andes. We’re not on some desert island.
We’re in the world as it is. And there is this violence. So what we did,
actually then — my wife and I, Nancy and I — and my wife’s name is Nancy
Regan. I always make that point. \[Laughter\]. But what we did is, we
just went from one antiwar movement, that is the antiwar movement in
Vietnam, to another antiwar movement. That is the undeclared war against
animals. We’re still peace activists. We’re still antiwar activists.

Hardy: What year would this have taken place?

Regan: Early 70s. So, I’m going to guess, let’s see, \[pause\] it had to
be in the — we were involved in the antiwar movement in the late 60s,
early 70s. By the time 1971, ‘72 we were moving into animal activism.

Hardy: I got a hold of your autobiography, I guess, in “The Bird and the
Cage”?\[2\]

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: And in there, I guess you said that the first article you
published in this was “The Moral Basis of Vegetarianism.”\[3\]

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: In the Canadian Journal of Philosophy.

Regan: That’s right.

Hardy: Tell me about the writing of that and how you got it published?

Regan: Yes. Actually Gandhi has a little pamphlet called “The Moral
Basis of Vegetarianism.” So I borrowed the title from Gandhi, and I
acknowledge that in saying that this title is one that Gandhi used. But
I go about it differently. What I was interested in at the time were two
questions. There’s a question about whether you can defend killing
animals in the world as we are, not on some desert island or something,
whether you can defend killing animals when you take into account the
pain and suffering that they experience, and the deprivation, the
quality, the conditions of their life. And then there’s a distinct
question where you ask whether you can defend eating animals apart from
that, just thinking about their death, that they have been killed,
whatever the circumstances of their life. It’s pretty clear that we
think that these two kinds of questions are different.

In the case of a human being, for example, you can imagine how somebody
is murdered, having been tortured and abused, and so on. A kind of
Jeffrey Dahmer scenario.\[4\] That certainly is a horrible and wrong
thing. But on the other hand, you can think of how someone might be
killed quite painlessly. You just simply slip something into their drink
and they fall asleep and never wake up. That’s also a horrible thing.
And so we’re very clear that, in the case of human beings, a question
about the wrongness of killing somebody is different than asking a
question about the wrongness of making them suffer. They \[the two
questions\] are conceptually different.

I was interested in those two questions about animals. The first
argument has to do with intensive rearing methods where animals are kept
in terrible, terrible conditions and are deprived and harmed in all
sorts of ways; then they’re put in trucks and shipped off to slaughter.
They have a horrible life, and they’re killed horribly. That’s the first
part of the question. But the second part is, suppose you raise them
decently. A hog kind of falls asleep, and you blow the brains out, and
they never feel anything.

What I wanted to argue is that in both cases there was something wrong.
And so I make the argument and send it off to the Canadian Journal of
Philosophy. It so happened that it was sent to a man (I found out later)
by the name of Kai Nielson who is a very, very well respected and good
philosopher, Canadian philosopher. When he got the paper, looked at the
title, he kind of chuckled, he told me, and said, “Ha, ha, ha. You know,
this is really ridiculous. What are we doing with a paper like this?”
And so, he read it, and read it, you know, and he just — he finally
said, “This is high quality work and it needs to be published.” I don’t
think I converted him, but that’s how I got started.

Hardy: Two questions. First is, how did you find out about the horrors
of the poultry or the beef industries. And second is, why the Canadian
Journal of Philosophy?

Regan: Well, let’s see. The way I find out about the conditions in which
animals were raised, in particular, was through a book by the title of
Animal Machines. It was written by Ruth Harrison.\[5\] It was about the
British system. It was actually about how animals were raised in
intensive conditions in Great Britain. By the way, she just recently
passed away; I would say in the last three or four months. She was a
wonderful, an important and good person, and it’s a great loss.

In terms of the Canadian Journal \[of Philosophy\] — oh, I know how that
worked out. Because I had actually been asked to do a review for another
Canadian journal called Dialogue, and I’d written a review and, in fact,
I think I may have published an essay there. So I guess I felt
comfortable going to Canada. Maybe it’s my antiwar thing \[Laughter\] —
still trying to get out of America. I’m not sure. But, yes, the Canadian
journals were good to me, and, in fact, I eventually was asked to be a
visiting distinguished scholar at the University of Calgary. So I’ve
always had good relationships with the folks in Canada.

But then, what happened was that, we were — it was serendipity. I was
working on the “Moral Basis of Vegetarianism.” And at that time also,
Peter Singer wrote a review of a book in the New York Review of
Books.\[6\] The book was called Animals, Men, and Morals by Roslind and
Stanley Godlovitch, and James \[John\] Harris.\[7\] They were the
editors. The book was very important because for the first time in the
English-speaking world, that I’m familiar with anyhow, there were
philosophers who actually were addressing the question of animals, men,
and morals, the whole question about our moral relationships to other
animals. But Singer’s review came out and it was like a bombshell. I
mean, the review was so powerful, and the response to the review was so
powerful, that the editors of the New York Review of Books approached
Peter about writing a book. Peter agreed to do that, and that was how
Animal Liberation was born.\[8\] It was one of these really interesting
quirks of history that, as I say, the review was more important than the
book. And then the review released a very important book, as we all
know.

As it happened, Nancy and I were going to go to Oxford University to
spend some time there in the summer. I believe it was 1973, ‘72 or ‘73,
and Peter was at Oxford. I knew that from his review. I corresponded
with him, and when we were there we arranged a get-together. So he’s
working on the Animal Liberation, and I was working on my stuff. While
we were there, what we realized was that I had come across some things
in my work that Peter was unaware of — resources, writings — and he had
come across material that I was not aware of. So we proposed to one
another, “Why don’t we try to put all of this stuff together and see
what we come up with?” And so we did this in 1973, ‘74, or ‘75, I guess,
over the next year and a half or two years. And that ended up being a
book called Animal Rights and Human Obligations, which, for the first
time, brought together sources from history, from \[Thomas\] Aquinas and
Aristotle and \[Immanuel\] Kant and \[Jeremy\] Bentham and \[John
Stuart\] Mill and \[Artur\] Schopenhauer and many of the other great
philosophers.\[9\] It ends up that they do have something to say about
animals. Not very much, but — and often not very insightful — but still
historically important. So that was something.

I remember going to the American Philosophical Association meeting at
that time and pitching the book to an editor at Prentice Hall. And he
said to me, “What? You’ve got to be kidding? Are you going to do what?”
He just couldn’t believe it. And he said, “Well go ahead and send it to
me.” He was an imaginative fellow. His name was Bud Therian. He was
smart enough to understand that there was something there. And gosh, I
mean, that book has been — is still in print. We have a second edition,
and it’s still in print and, obviously, if Peter and I had time I think
we’d go ahead and do a third edition because there’s so much more work
now out there, contemporary work out there, that can be anthologized.

Hardy: You went to Oxford in the summer of ‘73?

Regan: I think it was ‘72, ‘73, yes.

Hardy: ‘73? And at that point there’s this Oxford group that’s now
become well known in the history of the animal rights movement. What can
you tell me about your experiences there? Did you meet with these
people?

Regan: No, not that I can recall at all. I was there because I was part
of the University of North Carolina at Asheville summer program and we
went over, and I — it was a strange thing. I was an American professor,
went over to Oxford to teach American students which — I don’t know, I
mean, that doesn’t make a whole lot of sense but —

Hardy: It’s a good deal for the American professors, right?
\[Laughter\].

Regan: It’s not a bad deal, right? And it was nice because Nancy and the
kids went along. So that was fun. But the only person that I can
remember meeting at that time was Peter. I didn’t have any other
contacts. But, of course, subsequently I have known Andrew Linzey and
Richard Ryder and Stephen Clark and the other folks who are part of that
original Oxford core of progressive thinking about animals. And it was a
very distinguished group of people, very distinguished.

I should mention, though, people probably know this — Peter Singer is
really pretty open about this. He, as he says, is not a lover of
animals; he doesn’t care much about animals. He doesn’t dislike them,
but he’s not like a gushy person when it comes to any animal. So it
wasn’t a matter of feeling for Peter. He was around these people, and in
particular, the Godlovitches and Harris, who are his real
contemporaries, and they were asking these questions about how animals
should be treated. They were vegetarians for ethical reasons, and this
is all new to Peter. He was really challenged by the depth of the
questions and the sincerity of the people who were asking them. And it
was that, it was the ideas that led Peter to the conclusions he reached.
So we owe a lot to Roslind and Stanley Godlovitch and Jim \[John\]
Harris, that’s for sure.

Hardy: When you all decided to collaborate on this book — why? What was
your motivation?

Regan: I think our motivation there was pretty simple. There were voices
who were not being heard, who were speaking to the issue about the moral
status of animals on both sides. For example, Aristotle thinks that the
lower exists for the higher, so that plants exist for animals, and
animals exist for human beings just as women exist for men and slaves
exist for their masters. We thought it was important that people know
about that. And of course, \[René\] Descartes with the whole — animals
are mindless automata. And the great, the boldness of Bentham and Mill
when they say animals matter just as much as human beings do when it
comes to pain and pleasure. All that we thought was important for people
to know. That it shouldn’t be, as it were, the private repository of two
scholars working in their garret. I mean, we should share this
information, let it become part of the conversation. Myself, I’m a real
process person, a big tent person in the sense that I think more speech
is better than less speech, whoever, whatever people are saying; let
them speak and the truth wins out. So, even though you had people like
Descartes and Kant and Aristotle and Aquinas who were saying what I
thought was all the wrong things, I thought it was important to give
them a platform to say it.

Hardy: So how did the collaboration work?

Regan: Through the mail. The whole thing was done through the mail. I
would send things to Peter and say, “How about this, that, and the
other?” And he’d send back, “How about this, that and the other, and
here’s a way of organizing it.” That’s how it all evolved. Of course,
Peter is so busy, and I wouldn’t say that I’m not. But we probably
should do a third edition.

Hardy: So Prentice-Hall bit. They went for the —

Regan: Yes, yes. Let’s see. Peter’s Animal Liberation came out, I think
in ‘75, and the Animal Rights and Human Obligation came out in ‘76, I
think? I mean, I’m not certain about the dates, but —

Hardy: Yes, I think those are right.

Regan: I think that’s correct. I kept writing things. I wasn’t writing a
book. I was just writing lectures, individual lectures and papers. In
1982 I collected some of those together and did a collection called All
That Dwell Therein: Animal Rights and Environmental Ethics.\[10\] I was
also writing on environmental ethics at the time. The whole question
about what are the foundational questions you have to answer if you’re
going to develop an ethic of the environment as distinct from an ethic
for the use of the environment. Those sorts of things. But I guess, all
along I was thinking that I probably had a book in me to write about
animals. And I was very, very lucky and got a grant from The National
Endowment for the Humanities to write a book on animal rights.

Hardy: This is for The Case for Animal Rights?

Regan: Yes, for The Case for Animal Rights.

Hardy: Before we get there, I’d like to ask you a little bit more about
the 70s. You’re, I guess, at this point, an Associate Professor, in
North Carolina.

Regan: Right.

Hardy: And you’re writing about vegetarianism and animal rights. And
what was both the professional and the public response to this sort of
scholarship?

Regan: Well, the professional response in philosophy generally was — I
guess “mixed” probably would be a good way to describe it. The point is
that \[pause\] for whatever reason, I was able to get material published
in respected journals. It wasn’t like, where it was published was second
rate or second tier or anything. It was published in good places, so in
that sense there was a kind of validation of the scholarship, a
competence and also the relevance of the issues. And I think that’s part
of what’s happening historically in philosophy, not just in my little
pond where I swim.

See, when I went to a graduate school, I mean, the idea of doing moral
philosophy was to study the language of morals. It was to do
meta-philosophy, as it’s sometimes called. That is, what we were
interested in is understanding how to understand moral discourse. When
people make judgments of right and wrong, or of justice and fairness, of
treachery and courage, what sort of things are they trying to say? Are
they trying to state some fact about the world? Are they trying to
describe what is the case? Or is language working in a different way?
And a lot of people were arguing, of course, that normative discourse,
moral discourse, doesn’t state any fact; it really is a way of venting
emotions, roughly \[like\] saying “Hooray” or “Boo,” depending on
whether you’re saying something positive or negative.

But what happened — and my take on it is it has to do with my generation
and the war — was that something happened and philosophers thought:
people are being killed here. And of course there’s the civil rights
movement and the feminist movement, and all of these things going on in
the street. And here we are in our study. And the question is, “What are
we doing?” So there’s a turn in the profession at that time to what’s
sometimes called applied philosophy, where you’re actually trying to
figure out what can a philosopher say, given the talents and skills that
a philosopher has, to contribute to the public discussion of these
issues.

So, what happened, as I say, for me then — the idea that I was able to
write about animal rights and environmental ethics and get this material
published was not in any way singular or unique. It was, if anything, a
symptom of a really important shift in what moral philosophers were
doing at the time. All the stuff we see today — at almost every
university there are courses in business ethics, medical ethics in the
medical schools, journalism ethics, legal ethics — all that goes back, I
think, to the late 60s, early 70s. That’s when things really started to
change. So as I say, I don’t think it was unusual for me to be able to
get published in good journals. It was just the way things were. Nor was
it unusual for me to be thinking about practical or applied things. It
was part of the shift in the canon.

Hardy: How about public response. Did you start to reach an — when did
you start to reach an audience beyond philosophers and academic peers?

Regan: Fairly early on. I had some contact with animal organizations in
the 1970s. Some, not a lot, but some. There was a woman in particular
who alas, has passed away also. Her name is Helen Jones. Helen was the
founder of an organization that at the time was called the Society for
Animal Rights, and then eventually became know as the International
Society for Animal Rights. But Helen was a very clear-headed animal
rights person. She understood the difference between animal rights
objectives on the one hand and regulation on the other. She just
understood that. (We could talk about that if you want to in a moment.)
I got to know her pretty well early on and worked with her.

But for the most part, my early lecture life was in an academic setting.
Later I went through a period where I had a lot of involvement with the
activist movement, with organizations and that. But I do less and less
of that right now.

Hardy: So how did you work with Helen Jones?

Regan: Only in terms of correspondence and several lectures that she
sponsored. But Helen was very, very instrumental in my own thinking.
See, when I first began to think about these issues, it was through the
food question. That was the question that got me into it as I mentioned.
I was very clear about what I thought about that, but I was less clear
about what I thought about other things. In particular, experimentation.
The first thing that I wrote about experimentation — I think it’s called
“Animal Experimentation, First Thoughts” — I basically said, “Well, so
long as it’s really important and the animals aren’t caused any
unnecessary pain, it’s okay.” That was my position. Helen Jones was
really mad about that. She thought that I was making a terrible mistake.
And in fact, I remember, at the time, I was prepared to say that General
Motors were using — they were using baboons or chimpanzees, some
non-human primate, in crash impact tests. They were putting these
animals in these sled-like things and just ramming them into walls at
high speeds to test seat belts and door construction. I was prepared to
accept that. Helen put my fingers to the fire and tried to help me see
how confused I was. So she had a good influence on me. But I was not
really actively involved.

I went to Great Britain. The RSPCA \[Royal Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals\] had a international conference on animal rights in
1975 at Cambridge University — Trinity College, Cambridge — and I was on
the program. I met Richard Ryder. I think that was when I met Andrew
Linzey, several other people. But I didn’t have a whole lot of
involvement with the organized movement, and I wouldn’t say that I had a
lot of opposition or anything from here on my own campus. It wasn’t like
people were out to get me. I never felt that in that early part. There
were some times later on when people were out to get me here, but we can
come to that later if you want to.

Hardy: Okay. I’ll make a note to get to that later. \[Laughter\]. In the
70s, early 80s, before we get to The Case for Animal Rights, you just
mentioned that you were involved with some activities or activist
organizations. What were those?

Regan: Well, as I say, it would be the Society for Animal Rights. I knew
a woman named Helen Nearing who — not Helen Nearing — Alice Herrington.
I also knew, actually, Helen Nearing — but Alice Herrington, she was
with the Friends of Animals. And there was a woman named Elinor Seiling
who was with an organization called — \[Pause\]. It slips me right now.
It’s an organization that since has gone out of existence.\[11\]

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

And so I had some dealings with them, but nothing official. I mean, I’ve
never really been officially aligned with any organization. I always
thought it was important to be independent of other organizations. But I
was not, at that time — see, there really wasn’t anything going on, not
like what we saw in the 80s and then into the 90s. It really hadn’t
gotten any steam yet. There were maybe some modest protests, those sorts
of things. But nothing, nothing like what we saw in the 80s and 90s.

Hardy: Okay, so you get the NEH Fellowship.

Regan: Yes, that was a remarkable time. I sometimes try to think back on
that. \[Pause\]. First, it was just a wonderful thing for the NEH in
general, and for philosophy in particular, that they would actually
support work like this — work that was from its inception going against
the grain of the culture. It would be very easy for the people to say,
“Well, you know, that’s not our business.” I knew I was going to be
saying things that — or I thought I would be anyhow — saying things that
challenged the status quo. It was awfully courageous of NEH to give me
that opportunity.

So I had a year off, a year of freedom to work. And I had an idea about
what I thought. I had to write a proposal obviously, and say, “This is
what I’m going to do.” But it was a situation where my ideas changed in
the course of working on it. It ended up that what I came out with at
the end was not what I started off with. It was intellectually the most
exciting time of my life because (as I’ve said to people) I felt like I
was along for the ride. I mean, I really did feel like I was discovering
rather than creating. I was being led, rather than leading. There was
something there that was drawing me rather than my forcing it. It was
just an amazing time. I don’t \[think\] I’ve ever thought any better
than I did then — which is a disappointing thing to say, obviously.
\[Laughter\]. But it was very exciting. I just can’t — I mean, I worked
tirelessly. And I wrote the book. It’s four hundred pages, and I wrote
it in ten months. I’m a compulsive re-writer. As I say, I’ve never seen
an English sentence that I thought I couldn’t improve, so I’m constantly
rewriting. I don’t know how many drafts the book went through. But it’s
a philosophical book. It’s not Animal Liberation.

I mean, the great strength of Singer’s book, I think, is the
accumulation of detail. It’s not so much the argument against
vivisection as it is the accumulation of stupidity and cruelty. Page
after page after page. It’s not so much the argument for vegetarianism,
I think, that is the strength of the book, as it is the gruesome
description of what’s actually happening. Its strength, I think, is
proportionate to its quality as exposé. This was dark and hidden. Now
we’ve put the light on it. This was invisible. Now it’s visible. A tour
de force. But my book wasn’t like that. My book, I don’t think, has any
description of any bad things that happens to anybody. It’s just a
theoretical book. And so it obviously never commanded the kind of
audience that Peter’s did — and understandably so.

Hardy: Yes. When did you first read Animal Liberation?

Regan: I read it soon after it came out. As I said, I read the review,
Peter’s review of Animals, Men, and Morals, and that was I think in ‘73.
And so I think Animal Liberation came out in ‘75. So I read it, you
know, soon after it came out. I’m sure Peter sent me a copy of it in
fact.

Hardy: What was your response?

Regan: I thought it was everything I just said. I thought it was an
extremely powerful book. And it was — Peter’s book is the sort of book,
I think, that for a general readership (and I mean this in a good sense
not a critical sense at all, for a general readership) it really can
give people this “aha” or “Eureka” or whatever experience where you
finally — where Saul becomes Paul. You pick up the book and you’re a
meat eater, and you put it down and you’re not. It has that power. And
as I say, I don’t think it’s because there’s some argument here; it’s
just that, you just think, “I can’t believe this!”

I mean, we just saw a video called “The Witness,” about an activist in
New York named Eddie Lama.\[12\] He does a lot of really interesting
things. It’s just one person trying to make a difference. One of the
things he has done is he has taken a van and made it into a mobile
television so you can drive up and stop and show things on the side of
the van. You know, there’s like a big TV screen on the side of the van.
The thing that he has particularly targeted is fur. What he does is he
goes out in the streets of New York two or three times a week and just
drives through New York and let’s people see these videos about where
fur comes from — from the ranches where animals are raised, and from
where they’re trapped. And what’s amazing is that in making this video,
“The Witness,” the filmmakers James LaVeck and Jenny Stein, they went
out — this is a documentary of Eddie — they went out with him, and their
cameraman was outside the van with a wide angle lens watching people
watch what they were seeing. And they would see what it was like for a
coyote to be trapped, or what it was like for a beaver to be trapped and
drowned, or what it was like to use anal electrocution to kill a ranched
fur bearing animal. You looked at these people looking at this and you
could just see their utter disbelief. This — it wasn’t an argument, it
was reality. Remember that, what was invisible is visible, what was in
darkness is in light. I think that’s the power that Peter’s book has.
Peter’s book is like Eddie Lama’s van in the sense that it opens the
door and let’s people see what happens. As I say, my book is not like
that.

Hardy: Did it have that impact on you?

Regan: I don’t think it did, to be perfectly honest, because I think I
had been reading the material, for example from Ruth Harrison’s book on
Animal Machines and from the literature that was coming out from Friends
of Animals, and Society for Animal Rights, and so on. I mean, I knew
about the Draize Test and the LD-50 Test and the kinds of research.
Although I didn’t know — I think I certainly learned more about the
strictly scientific research because of what Peter was able to bring
there. But Peter got his information about Draize Test, LD-50 and the
other kinds of stuff mainly from, relying on, Helen Jones, Elinor
Seiling, and so on. He went to their files, looked through their files,
got their material. He did everybody an enormous service.

But as I say, my book doesn’t do that. I have no exposé at all. It
really is a book in theory. The question is, “What’s the most adequate
moral theory, all things considered?” That’s really the question that’s
asked. If it ends up that the most adequate moral theory, all things
considered, includes recognition of the rights of animals, then that’s
important. You can write a book that says a lot of things about animal
rights, but if you don’t put it within an argument that says, “And this
is the way we should think about it,” then you haven’t done much
philosophically. So my idea was to give intellectual credibility or
standing to animal rights that was beyond exposé and beyond a thin
response. I wanted to give a thick response, a deep response, within the
context of theory. I wanted to talk about all the major moral theories
from Aristotle and Aquinas and Kant and Mill and Bentham and
contemporaries like John Rawls and Robert Nozick, and to put animal
rights in that context and see what we could, how it’d come out. I had
ideas about how it might come out, but it was clear to me that what I
ended up with was very different — I mean, it really was just very
different. I can talk about that if you want.

Hardy: Yes.

Regan: \[Pause\]. It would be nice to have a blackboard, or some
overheads or something. \[Laughter\]. There are different ways of
thinking about it. One is that you are always struggling with language,
the limits of language, when you’re dealing with animals. Some
philosophers talk about what they call “a lexical gap.” This is a gap in
the lexicon, a gap where there is no word, there is no expression for
this reality. And in part because there is no word, there is no reality.
To become real is to be named — that kind of idea. I know that that’s an
oversimplification. I wouldn’t want to say that one hundred percent of
the time, but sometimes I think that is true. And sometimes it doesn’t
matter. So the example is like — that when you peel a banana and there’s
that little white stringy thing, I don’t think there’s a name for that
little white stringy thing that’s hanging on a banana. So there’s a
lexical gap there, but it’s no big deal.

But some people pointed out that there’s a lexical gap when it comes to
descendant from slave in America. There’s no word for that, no word that
pulls that reality out. So it’s as though it’s in the same category as
that stringy thing that hangs on a banana. It’s not worthy of being
named, it’s not important enough to have a name. But you know, it is
important enough to have a name. So you start wondering why we haven’t
named it, and that’s where you start to get into the deep racism of the
culture. But similarly, what we’ve got is — we’ve got an odd lexicon. We
have humans and then we have animals. And it’s like humans aren’t
animals, and animals aren’t humans. Here’s a big circle representing
animals, and here’s another big circle representing human. My interest,
you might say, is trying to make the argument that those two circles
overlap in really significant ways, and we don’t have a word for it. We
don’t have a name for it.

Hardy: So this is what you were about in 1983?

Regan: Right. When I look back on it, that’s what I see. I wasn’t aware
that that’s what I was about, but when I think about it now, I think, I
was struggling to find the words to name something that has no name.

Hardy: What were you thinking about when you began the project? Because
you — remember, in your autobiography you say that where you ended is
very, very different from where you began. So where did you begin? And
then take us through to the other end.

Regan: Sure. Well, where I began, was — let’s put it this way. When I
started off writing the book, I thought I probably would continue to
come down on the food question the way I had from the very beginning. I
mean, you should become a vegetarian, that you can’t justify blah, blah,
blah. And in terms of experimentation, to take that as another example,
I thought, well, what I’d probably argue is that if it’s really
important, and if the animals are not caused any unnecessary pain, then
that would be okay. It was like taking the stuff that I had written in
essays and just make a book of it and those would be the substantive
moral conclusions I would come to. What that would mean is I would have
this notion that animals had rights, but that these rights could be
overridden if there was a conflict between important human needs and
animal rights. That would have been something new and something
different for sure, but as I say, that’s not where I ended up.

But to do that, what I had to do was to try to answer people who were
critical of the notion of animal psychology. If animals are in the same
category as shoes and computers, then it’s going to be hard to argue for
their rights. I mean, I don’t know anybody who’s going to take that
argument seriously. So a precondition of arguing for their rights would
be to try to argue for their mentation — that is, for their minds, for
their psychological presence in the world, for their subjectivity,
rather than their thinghood. It was clear to me that I had to do that.
That’s what I did in the opening part of The Case for Animal Rights —
argue for animal consciousness against the critics. And then what I also
wanted to do was to argue for the sophisticated psychology that they
have. In other words, it’s one thing to say that if you step on the
puppy’s paw, it hurts the puppy, and it’s quite another thing to say
that animals have the capacity to plan and choose and remember and
anticipate and make choices. I wanted to argue for that as well. There
are contemporary philosophers who deny that animals have the ability to
believe anything because they can’t use a language. That language is a
precondition of believing things. And so I had to take on that crowd of
people. There were some very good philosophers who maintained this. I
mean, philosophers who are just better philosophers than I am maintain
this. I just think they’re mistaken on this point, so I had to clear the
decks for them, too. And then I had to say something about what you mean
when you’re talking about the quality of life for animals. That was all
kind of platform building, stage setting.

Now, assume for the sake of argument I’m right, that there are massive
numbers of animals who not only are in the world but aware of the world,
not only in the world and aware of it now but can anticipate the future
and remember the past, who can act with intention, can make choices,
have social relations, a sense of social reality; complicated creatures.
How — what’s their moral status? I looked at different ways of thinking
about their moral status. And as I worked my way through that, it became
clearer, and clearer, and clearer to me that that initial point that I
had been thinking — that they had rights but that those rights could be
overridden when they conflicted with important human needs — that that
was just profoundly mistaken. I was just dead wrong about that. Helen
Jones had been right about it all along. She didn’t have a theory for
it, but she had the right judgment about it. That rights are really not
worth the paper they’re written on if it ends up that they can be
overridden anytime somebody has an important need that conflicts with
them. That’s what became clearer, and clearer, and clearer to me so
when, at the end of the day, when all of the dust settled, what I had to
say was not only shouldn’t we eat them, we shouldn’t experiment on them
either. The one evil is as bad as the other evil, except in terms of the
numbers involved.

So, to say that they have rights means that we cannot justify what we do
to them because we benefit from it, even assuming that we do benefit.
See, if somebody says the reason we use animals in experimentation is
because it leads to these important medical advances and it saves human
lives, et cetera, that’s basically the benefits argument, the
utilitarian argument. I think there really is a serious question about
whether that’s true or to what degree it is. But secondly, the point is,
that doesn’t justify violating anybody’s rights. You can’t justify
violating human rights because other people are going to benefit, and
you can’t justify violating animal rights because we’re going to
benefit. It just doesn’t work that way. Morality doesn’t work that way.

Hardy: Okay, you’ve written that when you were working through this
process over the course of a better part of a year; you’re writing
eighteen hours a day.

Regan: Well, I was writing a lot, yes. \[Laughter\].

Hardy: And you’re in the midst of what you say was the most sustained,
close to a religious or spiritual experience you’ve ever had. Which
wasn’t just sort of that brief momentary epiphany but —

Regan: Day in and day out. I’m high.

Hardy: What was that? Explain.

Regan: I’m high, not from any drugs or anything. I just was excited. I
got up in the morning, ate breakfast, sat down and started writing. I
was just so happy. I mean, it was just so great. It was like, “yes,”
“yes.” You know, you get that “yes” feeling and keep writing, keep
writing. At the time I did a lot of long-distance running. I was running
marathons and a lot of 10K races. I got to the point where I would take
a pen and paper with me when I went running because these ideas kept
coming. I just had to write them down, even if it was just a word or a
couple phrases or something that would trigger my memory when I got
back. So I’d sometimes come in from a run, sweating, and just run to the
typewriter. It was before having any kind of word processor. It was an
old electric typewriter, just type, type, type, type, type, type, type.
And a lot of handwritten stuff too. I didn’t have teaching
responsibilities, now that I think of it. I traveled and gave lectures,
academic lectures and some public lectures as well. I love public spaces
to work in. I just really get charged up in them. I wrote the whole
eighth chapter of The Case for Animal Rights in airports, on airplanes,
in motels, and at restaurants — the first full draft of it anyhow, in
long hand, just writing it. I was like that. And I’ve seen people over
the years, on planes, and in terminals and so on — from a distance I’d
look at them, and it seemed to be that they were in the same space I was
at the time, where they just kept writing and writing, just kind of on
fire. That’s the way I’d put it. It was like you were on fire. You just
couldn’t get it down fast enough, even if you ended up having to revise
it. Mozart, if you remember — the film “Amadeus” captures it well;
Mozart would simply sit down and write the thing.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[End Tape 2, Side A; Begin Tape 2, Side B\]

Regan: That was it. He was kind of — \[snaps finger\]. And Byron was
like this as a poet, too, with just one leap. He would say the lion
leaps once. Whereas Beethoven was just, you know, notebooks, and
notebooks, and this and that and everything; it was very complicated. It
was a very laborious process. I think I’m much more like Beethoven than
Mozart. I mean, I’ve always got to rewrite the thing. But what was
exciting for me was, it was as close to Mozart as I ever got, I think.
Where you just kind of just — it just was on the page really easy. I
can’t remember, was it Hemingway who said, “How do you write? You sit
down and put a blank sheet of paper and then you sweat blood.” Writing
is not an easy thing for me, except it was very easy then.

Hardy: Okay. Practical question. You got a wife and kids at this point.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: What’s — and you’re in the midst of this.

Regan: I’m nuts. I’m temporarily nuts, yes, right. \[Laughter\]. Well,
no, they were terrific. I dedicate The Case for Animal Rights to Nancy
“for \[her\] patience with my love.” They were really good. They just —
I mean, I didn’t abandon them or anything like that. I wasn’t nasty, but
I was obviously very preoccupied and they just let me alone.

Hardy: You’re writing the book and all of a sudden you come through — I
guess not, but through the course of it, you come to this new position
about, sort of, animal rights that are innate and that cannot be
abridged or overridden because of human needs.

Regan: That’s correct.

Hardy: And then you have to immediately then start to thinking about,
well, what are the consequences in the real world.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: If this view is embraced by others.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: What were your thoughts?

Regan: Well, if you mean what were the practical implications of it?
Yes, well, the practical implications of it were far more radical than
anything that I had anticipated. The Case for Animal Rights ends up
being this deep critique of social institutions. See, I guess I had
thought about it — when I was thinking about it from my early Gandhi
days, about being a vegetarian and stuff like that, I was thinking about
it as choices in personal morality. How should I live? What should I do?
That kind of thing. But what comes out of it is that the whole culture
is wrong. I mean, the culture is based on — from the point of view of
animal rights — the culture is built on a foundation of institutional
evil. It’s the institutions. People’s choices make the institutions
possible. No question about that. I mean animals are raised and killed
because people eat them. No, there’s no question about that. But at the
same time, if you look behind that wall as it were, it’s really the
institution that’s the fundamental evil. You can’t have the institution,
you can’t raise animals for food, you can’t use animals in laboratories
without violating their rights. Anyhow, it ends up being a social
critique, whereas I hadn’t thought of it in those terms. A cultural
critique. When I started off, as I say, I was thinking of it in terms of
individual choices more than anything else; buy cruelty-free for your
cosmetics and don’t eat veal, that kind of stuff. I hadn’t thought that
there’s some really deep structural evil that makes these institutions
possible.

Hardy: So you got the manuscript complete and you’re going to send it
off to — I guess, the University of California Press published it? And
you must have had some hopes or fears or suspicions about who would read
it, what impact it would have.

Regan: Yes. I just wanted to say though, one other thing that as I was
thinking about this, I’m going to have to — let me look at something
though before I say this.

Hardy: While you’re doing that I’m going to move this clock.

Regan: Sure. \[Pause\]. I should have looked at this just to be clear
about this. The grant from the Endowment to work on The Case for Animal
Rights was actually 1980 to ‘81. I finished it in ‘81. And then it goes
a year in production, comes out in 1983. And the other thing that I
remember is that after finishing the manuscript for The Case for Animal
Rights, I was at Brooklyn College for a semester as a visiting
distinguished scholar there. I just wanted to clarify that, because that
was also a very exciting time, because the book had gone off and I was
doing page proofs and stuff like that when I was at Brooklyn. That’s
what made me think about taking a look at these dates. So when the book
goes out —

Hardy: Before the book goes out —

Regan: Yes?

Hardy: What, I mean, you’ve gone through this real sort of radical shift
in your thought, in recognizing the evil of the institutional structures
in relation to animals, and you must have had some thoughts about fears,
hopes, about who would read it, how it would be received, what impact it
would have.

Regan: Yes I did. I think that \[pause\] — I knew it was solid
philosophy in the sense that it was competent. Is it true? I mean, the
best you can do as a philosopher is, with whatever abilities you have,
say, “Here are the ideas. I’m going to think about them really carefully
and tell you what I think. And I’m going to try to support it and
clarify it and so on.” But does it stand up? I don’t know. I always tell
my students I have what I call the “Bozo Theory of Truth,” based on Bozo
the clown, a little inflatable clown that the kids used to have. You’d
blow Bozo up. It had sand in the bottom, and you’d go in and you could
beat the daylights out of Bozo. And the thing about Bozo is, as long as
you hit Bozo fairly and cleanly and played the game, Bozo would come
back up. My view is, truth is like that. The truth withstands any fair
criticism, so what you do when you do philosophy and any other thing of
comparable kind I guess is you say, “Here’s my Bozo. Knock it down.” You
have reason to think that what you’ve said has some claim to truth only
after you’ve seen whether people can knock it down.

And so, of course, what I was looking forward to on the one hand was
finding my peers trying to knock it down; and they certainly tried to do
that. There was a lot of critical response to it. A lot of very
favorable things said about it by my peers, and that was very rewarding.
I think originally, I had — perhaps I think, now naively I thought it
might have some impact on the movement. But I — it may have had some
impact on the movement in the sense that there was something that said
The Case for Animal Rights. So there might have been some contribution.
But it never had the impact, for example, that Animal Liberation had. It
was always one of the great ironies that took me some time to acclimate
to: that Animal Liberation would be referred to as the “bible of the
animal rights movement” and yet Singer thinks that animals don’t have
rights. So for some time that kind of got to me. But I mean, I’m past
all that now. \[Laughter\].

Hardy: So how did it get to you?

Regan: Well, first of all I was upset because I thought a movement that
represents itself through a book that denies what it believes in is
going to have a hard time understanding what’s it’s doing. But at the
same time what I have come to realize is that I was really writing for a
different audience. I was writing for not so much an activist audience
as I was writing for a philosophical audience. So, that’s what I mean.
At the time, though, I think before it first came out, I thought this is
really going to make a difference to the movement. But I don’t think it
did. And I don’t think — except for a few people like the Helen Jones —
I don’t think people were that interested in ideas, and understandably,
I guess. I mean they were interested in making changes in the concrete
world; not the world of theory but in the real world.

Hardy: Which is an absolutely perfect segue to get from the relationship
of the world of ideas in the philosopher to the world of movement and
social change. So let’s take a break. I’ll switch the tape and then
we’ll come back.

Regan: Sure. Okay. \[Tape interruption\].

Hardy: Okay. So I guess, we’ll repeat the question. As we’re — back to
1983. Our segue was the relationship between the world of ideas and the
world of social action. And so you were going to tell me a bit about the
movement back in the time when you were writing The Case for Animal
Rights.

Regan: From the very beginning of America — from European presence in
America, put it that way — there has been concern for animals. The body
of Liberties of the Massachusetts Bay Colony from 16-something — I can’t
remember the exact date.\[13\] But it does say cruelty to animals is not
permitted. So from the beginning of the European presence in America up
‘til the present day there has been concern, some of it taking the form
of anti-cruelty statutes regarding animals. And people were concerned
when they would find particular abuses like the mistreatment of horses
at the turn of the century or what was called “pound seizure,” where
your dog or your cat might be picked up and end up in a laboratory being
used in research. There were organizations which step forward and say,
“This is a bad thing and we need to stop this.” All this was a reformist
mentality. There were some bad things that needed changing. But the idea
that we could continue to view animals and treat animals as our
resources, as though their reason for being in the world is for our
convenience, or improvement, or entertainment, or our needs, that went
unchallenged in America, I would say.

And so the organizations we had both at the beginning of the century and
up until the first three-quarters of the century were these welfare
reformist organizations, with the exception of Helen Jones, again, who
understood that an animal rights position is an abolitionist position.
It’s not reform. You’re not trying to keep the evil and make it better,
you’re trying to get rid of the evil. You’re not trying to accept the
principle but reform the practice, you’re trying to end the practice
because of the principle. It’s very much like other kinds of debates.
It’s very much like the debate about the death penalty in the sense that
a lot of people wanted to say, “What we should do is get rid of the
death penalty altogether. It’s cruel and unusual punishment. It’s
barbaric, et cetera.” Other people are saying “No, no, no, no. If you
stone people to death, or if you set them on fire, or if you cut their
heads off in a public square, now there’s something wrong with that. But
so long as you kill them humanely or respectfully, it’s okay.” The
forces of reform in the death penalty and the forces of abolition in the
death penalty — the animals rights movement is like that.

And I would say it was not until the early 1980s that the idea of a
serious abolitionist mentality began to develop in America. That would
be my guess. And the people I think mainly responsible for that actually
were Ingrid Newkirk and Alex Pacheco when they founded PETA \[People for
the Ethical Treatment of Animals\] in 1983, I believe it was.\[14\]
Nancy and I were invited to Washington. There were about forty or fifty
people, and this was the beginning of PETA. We went to a dinner there,
an informal dinner, and that’s when they started. PETA was no-nonsense,
at the time, just a no-nonsense radical group. I mean, they were out to
abolish it, end it all, every form of exploitation. And that really did
change the movement, it seems to me. Since then there have been — there
are any number of other organizations who have the same ideology, that
are abolitionists rather than reformists. Mainstream organizations, like
the Humane Society of the United States, the Animal Welfare Institute,
organizations of that kind, the American SPCA — those organizations are
still reform-minded folks. I always say everybody does some good, nobody
does only good. And I’m sure they’ve done some good. But the ideology of
abolition you get with In Defense of Animals or with some of the other
organizations, I think, is importantly different. Certainly,
ideologically I’m part of that movement. Whether The Case for Animal
Rights had any role in shaping that movement, I don’t know, but I doubt
that it had a great deal of impact in terms of building up the movement.
But what happened in the 80s —

Hardy: Let me back up. When was your first — tell me about your first
contact with the PETA folks.

Regan: Well, that was it. I’m going to say it was ‘82 or ‘83. I think it
was ‘83. Somebody phoned us, I think, and said, “We’d like you to come
up to Washington as our guests for a small party that we’re having.”
That’s when we met Alex and Ingrid for the first time. They were going
to start this new organization, and it was going to be a radical
organization in the sense — not in the sense that, you know, burn
buildings down or anything, but the ideology — not reforming the
institutions; getting rid of the institutions of oppression. It was
where I was. It was what I saw, what I had written about. So it was
perfect for me.

Hardy: What did you think of this first meeting?

Regan: To tell you the truth, I don’t remember a whole lot about it. I
remember it was a very nice home in northwest Washington, a small group
of people. I remember meeting them and talking to them, but it wasn’t —
at the time, I mean, it wasn’t anything that stuck out at the time or
sticks out now. It was there; it happened. But it was very exciting
because they were like the new kids on the block and they meant
business.

What happened during that period, that decade, was that PETA became the
public voice for the Animal Liberation Front. The Animal Liberation
Front would be involved in unlawful activities, as I’m sure you are
aware. They would vandalize places and liberate animals or do various
things and then, instead of themselves calling a press conference and
saying, “We’re the ones who did that,” they would use PETA as their
spokesperson. And PETA would distance themselves from committing the
illegal acts, but nonetheless served as the mouthpiece. This got PETA a
lot of publicity obviously. And it also gave the strong radical edge to
what they stood for, what they represented, what they were about.

One of the most important episodes in all this was the theft of video
tapes at the head injury laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania,
Dr. \[Thomas\] Generelli’s laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania.
PETA edited these and produced a video called “Unnecessary Fuss.” And
this was so damning; this was just so incredible. These were videos that
were taken by the vivisectors. It wasn’t a hidden camera or anything.
They were videos that were taken of their vivisection and of their
interactions with the animals. And what it gave people for the first
time really that I was aware of — it permitted people to see how
vivisectors talked about animals, how they treated animals, the kind of
science they did, the violations of laws that were involved, eating,
smoking. It was just incredible, just incredible! If PETA had hired
actors to create the worse scene you can think of in a laboratory, it
wouldn’t have been any different. I mean, this was just horrible.

So you would think that armed with that kind of information that you
could shut down a laboratory. They struggled and tried and struggled and
tried to do it, and nothing was happening. And so I, along with one
hundred others, occupied the eighth floor of one of the buildings on the
NIH \[National Institutes of Health\] campus, the executive offices. It
was masterfully conceived and executed. We just all did a classic sit-in
and took over these offices.

Hardy: Before we get to that, because this to me is fascinating: your
whole involvement in civil disobedience. So can you walk me through it
step by step. And let’s start — when did you first see the video tape?

Regan: That would be something that I — Nancy would help me remember
this, but I honestly cannot remember now. But I do think it was 1986. It
was just sent to me and we looked at it. And PETA made it available to
everybody, including everybody in Congress, because this is federal
funding that was going on right there.

Hardy: So had you seen any of the video tapes from the labs before you
decided to —

Regan: Oh, I had seen, oh, yes, yes, yes, yes. Yes, I mean, before I got
involved in the sit-in, sure, yes, yes. And then I think — I can’t
remember who contacted me. It may have been Alex. I’m not sure who
called me and said, “We’re going to do this and we’d like you to be
involved. These are the arrangements, et cetera.” And I can remember,
let’s see, how did this go? \[Pause\].

I drove. I remember driving up with my daughter, Karen. And I guess,
well, at the time, I didn’t think that we would end up — it would end up
being as long. It was just a father and daughter bonding thing. We drove
up there and we met — everybody got together at the hotel that evening
not far from where we were going to go and worked out the plans. It was
a bit of a trick to get over a hundred people in the same building at
the same floor at the same time. They had to have some people coming up
stairs and some people coming down stairs, and some people getting off
elevators, and it was something of a choreographer’s challenge, a
challenge for a choreographer. But Alex and others were involved in
working all that out. And it ended up we spent four days there.

Hardy: When did you decide that you were going to participate?

Regan: I guess I probably talked to Nancy about it and said, “It sounded
like a good idea.” And I thought I’d just drive Karen up, and we’d do
it, come back, and she ended up being hung up there outside. She wasn’t
inside, but they took care of her. It was amazing. We were able to get
food in and out and communications in and out. It was just classic; it
was a pure Gandhian thing. It really was. And I do remember very
clearly, at the end of it all, there was some talk at the end of it all,
of doing some trashing of stuff. I remember that because the people were
fed up, but I was, I guess, moved by Gandhi and encouraged people not to
do that at all. And in fact, what we did was we found vacuum cleaners
and everything and cleaned the place up as best we could before we left.

But when we walked out of there it was not only that we had risked
arrest and borne testimony and done all the rest of that, but we had
won. They had cut off funding for the lab, pending an investigation,
blah, blah, blah, blah. It was the best you could do under the
circumstances. It was a classic victory for civil disobedience. It was
just so elegant and beautiful and pure. It was just extraordinary and it
gave such power to the movement at that time. It was like: “We could do
this. See, all we have to do is be smart, pick our battles, get the
information, get the people. Do it.” It required talents of many people,
many different people. You know, it didn’t require any talent on my
part. I was just a body. But the people who executed that were really
quite brilliant in what they did.

And so, as I say, you just thought \[what\] it was like, for somebody as
old as me anyhow. It really was like a successful sit-in in Greensboro
during the civil rights movement when the blacks finally sit-in at the
lunch counter. That’s what it felt like. It was consistent with
everything I believed in and hoped would happen. And then subsequent to
that —

Hardy: Before we got to subsequent; you’re in your mid-forties.

Regan: I guess I am, yes. I hadn’t thought about that, but I guess I am.

\[End Tape 2, Side B; Begin Tape 3, Side A\]

Hardy: What sort of civil disobedience did you participate in before?

Regan: Nothing on that scale at all. I mean, I marched in marches and
stuff like that but nothing, nothing. Am I in my mid-forties? I guess I
am. Yes, it was a no brainer. It was a very easy thing to do, a very
easy thing to do.

Hardy: So you got the call in how many days, or how much time before the
—

Regan: A day or so, I think. It was pretty quick.

Hardy: So you got the call. You figure, “Okay, I’ll bring the kid
along.”

Regan: True. We’d just go up for the day. Right. Right.

Hardy: “We’ll go for the day, they’ll be a couple of hours, we’ll come
back home that night or we’ll stay overnight and come back.”

Regan: Yes, so it ended up being four days. Yes.

Hardy: And did you have any — what understanding did you have in advance
of what would take place? Because by then they were trashing labs out on
the west coast.

Regan: Yes. Well, we were just going to go sit in and demand that they
stop funding. And what we all thought and certainly what the planners
thought was that they would come and arrest us flat out right away. But
I don’t know. I mean, it could have been that there was a logistical
problem. We were on the eighth floor of one of the buildings. I can’t
remember what it was. And it could have been too much trouble to get the
police up there and get us down one by one or whatever. I don’t know.
But I think they made a strategic mistake. The NIH people made a really
dumb mistake when they said — what do they think we’re going to do. Go
away? I mean we’re going to stay there. So it just fed the story. I
think they’d be smarter now. I think they’d arrest us right away now.

Hardy: Yes. But you’re going up with your daughter. And you’re expecting
to be arrested.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: What’s going to happen to your daughter?

Regan: Well, it’d be a misdemeanor, you’d be out in no time, you know,
really. It wouldn’t be any problem. So it wasn’t like I was just going
to abandon her on the side of Interstate 95 or something like that.
\[Laughter\]. When I left to go in, she was in the care of another
person.

Hardy: Yes. Okay. And now you’re going in there. You go in, they don’t
arrest you, and you’re not going home that night. It drags on for a day,
and then two days. And what’s taking place as the days progress?

Regan: Well, one of the things that happened was that a number of people
left. For example, there were people who had jobs that they had to get
back to or they had animals for whom they were responsible or they had
children or whatever, and they had responsibilities that were
compelling. I remember now having discussions with people and how torn
they were about where their major responsibilities were, and how bad
they felt about making the decision to leave. But I don’t think that we
ever put any undue pressure on anybody to stay. We just said, “You have
to make your — you have to make these choices,” and some did. I don’t
remember what the total number was. But it was less than what went in.
We spent a lot of time talking and singing and chanting and whatever.

Hardy: At some point you must have thought, too, that they’re going to
wait us out.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: And you must have thought, “How long will I stay?”

Regan: Yes. But see, the thing is that one of the things that was
happening was there was a lot of media presence, a lot of media
interest. For example, I think they turned the air conditioning on or
something one night, or turned the heat off or something, but it was
freezing cold. Anyhow, they did something. It ended up being freezing
cold, and apparently there were all these calls and letters and faxes
and so on about how cruel they were being to these young people, blah,
blah, blah. So, as I say, they were — NIH were under the microscope more
than we were, and the longer we stayed in there, the worst it was for
them. That’s what gave us the leverage, to get the folks at the NIH to
finally act, to say, “We’re suspending funding of this laboratory
pending further investigations.” \[Tape interruption\].

For a number of years after that, PETA continued to be the spokesperson
for the Animal Liberation Front. And as a result of that, and other
efforts, underground efforts, they got video tape of things that were
very, very incriminating. And \[they\] continued to ratchet up the
pressure on experimentation and other sorts of uses of animals; for
example, uses of animals in cosmetic testing, that kind of stuff. But
several things happened, I think. One is that the vivisection industries
started thinking this is serious business and they made it harder to get
into these places. I mean, some of these places are real bunker places
now, so for an outsider to get in is very, very difficult indeed. Aside
\[from\] folks going in and releasing mink, for example, in mink farms,
those are comparatively speaking, much easier places to get into than if
you’re talking about a major research institution at one of the major
research universities in the country. It’s just a different story
altogether. It’s much harder to get in. So that sort of dried up the
flow of incriminating evidence and information.

And then also, I think, from my point of view, anyhow, PETA just lost
their way. Again, I always want to say that everybody does some good and
nobody does only good, and PETA has done a lot of good. But I just think
they got into a kind of prankster mentality. Their view seems to be that
any media is better than no media, and I don’t agree with that. When you
have — when you attract media by running naked through the streets, or
when you attract media by throwing pies in people’s faces, I mean, I
just think you’ve lost it. Just have lost it. It’s no longer about the
animals anymore. I just don’t agree with them about that.

Hardy: Well, let’s go back to summer of ‘85. It worked. Gandhian
principles, you all cleaned up afterward, no vandalism, it brought about
a significant impact. What takes place after that?

Regan: Well, nothing comparable. There continued to be episodes of
direct action for sure; no question about that. But having something as
well conceived where there’s a clear objective. You see, the thing about
Gandhi is, civil disobedience is the last resort, not the first resort.
You don’t do it merely for symbolic value. You do it because this is
what it’s going to take to get what you want. And you have a realistic
chance of getting it. And if you don’t, then you’re just wasting time
and energy and you’re — it’s like you’re dulling the tool, rather than
sharpening the tool. There were lots of cases of civil disobedience, but
it was symbolic. It was just a form of protest rather than a form of
strategy. I didn’t participate in that. I’ll give you another example.
It involved Higgins pigeon shoot in a small rural area up there in
Pennsylvania not far from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Schuylkill, I think
Schuylkill County, does that sound right?

Hardy: Yes.

Regan: In a little town called Higgins, they would annually have this
pigeon shoot. People would come in, and they’d kill five thousand
pigeons. They’d be in these like wooden crates, the pigeon would fly
out, and people would pay money and have shotguns and shoot the pigeons
and you would win prizes. Often what would happen is that the pigeons
would be wounded and fall in the field, and they had what they called
these pigeons boys who would go out and they’d get the pigeons and break
their necks or throw them in garbage cans. It was just a gruesome thing.
Fund For Animals took this on as a issue. Sometimes I think PETA was
involved. Yes, PETA was involved sometimes in protesting. There were
people who would run onto the field and get arrested. It was a form of
civil disobedience, breaking the law, but it was not well conceived in
my view. It was not — it was protest rather than strategy again. And so
in terms of after the Generelli thing, after the NIH, I don’t think
anybody ever used civil disobedience in the right way, as part of a
campaign, as a strategy rather than as a form of protest. Protest is —
that’s not what civil disobedience all about.

Hardy: Then in the late 80s you wrote an article, criticizing or
expressing your views on appropriate use of civil disobedience and
inappropriate use. Why did you write it and what was the response?

Regan: Well in part, I think — \[Laughter\]. Right; in part, obviously I
was rethinking it. See, the Gandhian principles are pretty simple to me.
I’m not against breaking the law, but I am against vandalism. I’m not
against liberating animals. But what I stand for is that if I’m going to
do that, I’m going to say that I did it and you’re going to have to
convict me. I’m not going to be a common criminal and break the law and
then run and hide. That’s not the way I conceive things. Now, other
people have different views about this, but my view is if you break the
law, you should stand and face the punishment. This is why you have to
be very careful. But the law recognizes the possibility of your defense
in a case like this. The law recognizes a greater evil defense. If you
can show that it was necessary for you to break the law to prevent a
greater evil from happening, then you can be absolved from any guilt.

Now what we have not done in the movement yet is to test that. What
happens now is that people break in, they trash labs and liberate
animals, and then they are gone in the dark of night. I certainly know
in Europe though, there are some folks who — let’s put it this way. In
the United States we haven’t done that yet. In Europe I do know there
are some young people who are actually trying to do what I’m advocating,
who have liberated chickens and come forth and say, “I did it.” And so
far, they have not been prosecuted. But we’ve never really tested it
carefully yet. I certainly hope we will.

Hardy: So in the late 80s you wrote this article, I’m assuming, in
response to the increasing vandalism and which you call the criminal
activity. What response did you get from PETA or the Liberation Front or
other folks?

Regan: I never got any official response from people in the Animal
Liberation Front about that. I guess I wouldn’t expect that. And PETA at
that point, they were into merchandising a lot; what I call the mindless
merchandising of the movement. I mean, it’s the idea, that — you’re
selling watchbands and backpacks and belts and PETA this, and PETA that,
merchandising, merchandising, merchandising. I have a hard time with
that too. It seems to me — I understand you have to raise money, to get
money. But it’s a funny thing. I think you lose your radical edge when
you become a merchandiser.

It’s funny. My ideal, of course, is Gandhi. And as we know, Gandhi goes
to his death with sandals, his glasses, a dhoti and a wooden bowl. But
what people don’t realize and need to know is that there are people with
a lot of money who are writing checks to make it possible for him to do
what he was doing as an activist. I mean, activism — he didn’t do his
activism on the basis of that wooden bowl. At the same time I don’t
think he was out selling watchbands and backpacks. You become what you
don’t resist — that old adage of activism. Part of the problem at the
deep level is that we live in this mindless consumer culture, and
animals get caught up in it. We’re just mindless about what we consume.
You become what you don’t resist when you become this mindless
merchandiser. I mean, just kind of part of the whole, the deep fabric of
what it is you’re trying to change. That’s what I think. All the
organizations do that to some degree, and I understand it. But I want to
make sure that it’s clear. I think that PETA has done an awful lot of
good. I think the Humane Society of the United States has done a lot of
good. I think Fund For Animals — I think all these organizations have
done a lot of good. And I think it would be very, very difficult to run
one of these organizations. It’s just extraordinarily difficult to do it
and to do it well. So anything critical that I’m saying is meant in the
sense of positive suggestions rather than dumping on people.

Hardy: Right.

Regan: The question is how do you find a better way of doing what it is
we’re trying to do.

Hardy: Okay. The Case for Animal Rights comes out. It really has an
impact. Sections of it have been anthologized a great deal. I think it
raises your celebrity or your visibility in the movement and you take on
a certain, I would assume, moral authority. You participate in the
occupation of the NIH office in ‘85, and now in the late 80s I would
assume that you do have an increased visibility along with Peter Singer
as one of the two principal philosophers or proponents of animal rights
and animal liberation. Tell me about this phase in your career, and
again thinking in terms of both what’s taking place in schools or in the
academic movement, and your relationship to the movement.

Regan: Let me say one other thing first. I remember when The Case for
Animal Rights came out. It was reviewed by Robert Nozick, who’s a very
well respected philosopher from Harvard, in the New York Review of
Books. It was a big deal to have your book reviewed in the New York
Review of Books by a big deal philosopher, by Nozick. I’d never met
Nozick. But I happened to go to an APA \[American Philosophical
Association\] meeting; I think it was 1984. So the book is out and he
reviewed it, and there he was walking around the APA. And I thought I’d
make bold, because I wanted to thank him for paying attention to the
book. I went up and introduced myself: “Professor Nozick, I’m Tom Regan
and I want to thank you for taking a look at my book.” And Nozick, said
— it was the most interesting thing, because I thought he understood me
better than anybody else walking around, even though he had never met
me. He said, “It’s very nice to meet you. What are you going to do now?”
He understood exactly what it was like to have gone through the process,
because he understood that was something that was done, and now the
question was, “now what? Now what am I going to do?” That’s what I had
been thinking about, you know, what am I going to do now? What happened
at that point is I said to him, I said, “You know, I’m not sure, but not
animal rights for awhile.”

As a thinker, what happens is that I turn to another area of my interest
that I had abandoned. My first publication as a scholar when I came here
to North Carolina State \[University\], the first peer reviewed piece
that got published, was a piece on an English philosopher named George
Edward Moore, G. E. Moore. I was interested in Moore. I had written my
master’s thesis on Moore, and my Ph.D. dissertation had some stuff on
Moore in it as well. But then I had just abandoned \[it\]. I had got
caught up in Gandhi and animal rights and so on. So I thought I’d go
back to that. From 1985 to 1988, ‘89, somewhere in that area, my major
academic interest was in the history of philosophy. I just set any kind
of serious, really serious long work on animal rights behind me. I
continued to write essays and give talks, but Moore was the focus of my
attention. And I actually got a — I was a fellow at the National
Humanities Center to write the book on Moore, which I was happy to do.
Then I did an anthology of his early papers with an introduction, and I
did a critical introduction to an unpublished set of lectures that he
gave. So I became a history of philosophy person for awhile.

At the same time \[I\] was active with organizations, and I was trying
to find my way there, find out how I could be of some help to
organizations. But I have come to feel that that’s not my strength. The
kind of talents that I have, I think, are not the kind of talents that
they need, and the kinds of needs they have are not the kinds of needs
that I can fill. I thought at one time I could do that. I thought at one
time I could provide some sort of assistance or leadership or help or
whatever, I don’t know what, to the organizations and the movement. For
a period of time, I would go around, and I’d give rabble-rousing
speeches and that kind of thing; not typical academic. You know, the
other side of my being. I enjoyed doing that, but I didn’t think that it
was going anywhere.

Hardy: Tell me about some of your rabble-rousing speeches.

Regan: \[Laughter\]. Oh, well, sometimes when I would give these
speeches, people would like them a lot, and then other people who knew
me, didn’t like them a lot. They thought that it diminished my standing
as an independent scholar and thinker. And I must say, I don’t know; I
went through that phase. I may go back to it.

Hardy: You know, we historians, we love examples, illustrations,
concrete evidence. Can you tell me about one or two of the
rabble-rousing speeches and sort of illustrate this or bring it to life?

Regan: Oh, I’m not sure that I can do that. \[Laughter\]. But, it’s been
— I’ll just put it this way: I remember giving a speech outside the
federal building in Los Angeles concerning research, vivisection, and I
remember giving a speech at national meetings. See, I guess what I think
is this, that sometimes the point of a speech should be that you inform
and sometimes the point of a speech should be that you empower. And of
course, the best combination is one where you both inform and empower.
And to me, I mean, the part of the thing about empowering is to kind of
raise your voice a bit. \[Laughter\]. I’ll leave it at that.

Hardy: Okay. So when do you being to sort of recognize that this is not
your role?

Regan: Certainly in the 90s, I guess, I was the co-organizer of the
first ever March on Washington for animals. This was in 1990, and I
spent a lot of time along with a lot of other people going around the
country trying to organize people to come to the march. The other person
who actually did much more of the administrative work was a lawyer from
the DC area named Peter Gerard. He and I were the co-chairs. And it was
certainly going into that, 1990, I’m giving a rabble-rousing speech in
front of the Capitol, and we have somewhere around 50,000 people who
show up. It’s the biggest gathering ever for animal rights in America.
So at that point I’m heavy into being involved in the movement and
working with other organizations. And I continue to do that off and on a
bit. Peter actually organizes another march in 1996. I am not involved
in organizing it. Originally, I’m not even going to participate in it
because I have various objections. But I go up and I give my speech —
which is not a very good speech. But I think by then, let’s see — that
period between 1990 and 1996 is where I’m kind of becoming — losing my
sense of attachment to being involved in the day-to-day activities of
the animal rights movement. I mean, I worked really hard and I don’t see
that I’m having much impact or much influence. And that’s
understandable. So I just think, well, there probably are better things
to do.

What I’m really interested in now, of course, is continuing to do my
academic work. I have a book that should be out before the end of the
year with University of Illinois Press called Defending Animal Rights. I
have a book coming out next spring with another philosopher, Carl Cohen,
called The Animal Rights Debate. So, I mean, I’m going to continue to
publish philosophy and lecture in philosophy. And I’m especially — what
I find especially important to me is to not walk away from this
university and have it be that I was never here. I mean, it happens with
a lot of faculty, it seems to me. You come, you give your life to a
place, and then you leave. There’s hardly any shadow that’s cast. What I
want to try to do is to make sure that when I leave, the work that I’ve
done is there, here, for anyone else who wants to carry it on. Now,
whether anyone else wants to carry it on, I don’t know. But that’s
really, I think, a very top, maybe my top priority right now, to try to
leave behind something that can be used to build on.

So I’ve given my papers to the library, and they’re going to use that as
the basis of an animal rights archive. Our hope is to create an archive
on animal rights that’s the best in the world and that is used as a
basis, I hope, of creating a center for the study of animal rights at
the library. If all that were to come to pass, then I would feel like I
could go to my grave knowing that not only did I give my life to the
university, but that the life that I gave continues to live through this
entity. That’s really important to me.

And I know from my life as a scholar — for example, working on the
history of philosophy, in particular — how important it is to have
original materials. I mean, anybody who does any kind of historical work
knows just how important that is. To go to a good, a really good
research library and to ask for this and ask for that and for it to be
there; it’s just so important. So if the animal rights movement really
is the kind of movement we think it is, if we think it is going to be a
transformative movement, it’s going to be something that one hundred
years from now people will wonder how all this happened. You know, here
we are a radically different society a hundred years from now than we
are now; then I think archiving all this stuff is really going to be
important for future historians.

Hardy: So it sounds like your attention has shifted towards retirement
and your own mortality, right?

Regan: \[Laughter\]. Yes, yes, I think so.

Hardy: How many more years do you think you’re going to be teaching?

Regan: I don’t know. Certainly another year and a half, but beyond that
I’m not sure. I think what I’d like to do is to retire and write and
travel and lecture. That’s what I think. The ideal situation would be
where I could remain at the university in a research capacity. That
would be ideal. I mean, I’d be relieved of teaching duties but continue
to do my research and publishing and lecturing. That would be ideal. But
I don’t think that’s going to happen.

Hardy: How much more time do we have?

Regan: I can talk for another while.

Hardy: Okay. What I probably will end up doing is coming back a second
time to sort of fill in, from the late, from the mid-80s on forth.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: Since publication of The Case for Animal Rights in 1983, how have
your thoughts evolved?

Regan: Well, this goes back to what I was talking about earlier in terms
of seeing more clearly what it was that I was trying to do. If you
remember the lexical gap stuff we were talking about where part of the
problem was that there’s no word for what you want to talk about. What I
do is I create this vocabulary, which was not the greatest, but it seems
to remain the best, so far as I can tell, where I talk about “subject of
a life.” That overlap between these animals and these humans, right
there, there’s subject of a life overlapped between those two circles
because there are some humans who are not subject of a life — those born
without a brain or brain-dead or irreversibly comatose or whatever.
They’re human, but they’re not subjectively present in the world. And
there are some animals, it seems to me, that are going to be classified
as animals anyhow, that are in the world but not subjectively aware of
it. I don’t think consciousness goes all the way down. But you can see,
there’s just no word for that overlap. You’re either a human or you’re
an animal. We just carve the world up in a very strange way.

So what I now think is that that’s symptomatic of our wanting to create
this sense of moral distance between us and them. We have no word for
them when they are like us. And we have no word for us when we are like
them, because we don’t want there to be that likeness. We don’t want it,
so we don’t name it. So that’s part of, I think, what I was wrestling
with: trying to figure out what is this thing I’m trying to make sense
of. And the other thing is that there are two ways, two major
philosophical traditions amongst many others, but there are two major
ones. One is utilitarianism, where the right thing to do is determined
by the consequences of what’s done.

Hardy: And this is Peter’s Singer’s —

Regan: Yes, this is Singer’s point of view, yes. When I’m lecturing with
my students — for the utilitarian actions are like arrows and the right
act hits the bull’s eye. It brings about the best consequences, and
anything that misses the bull’s eye is wrong, more or less. If you just
barely miss the bull’s eye, it’s wrong, but hardly. If you’re way out
here, it’s really wrong; you miss the bull’s eye by a lot. But there’s
only one way of hitting the bull’s eye, you know, and that’s to do the
right thing. And that depends on how others are affected, what the
results are, what the outcomes are, what the effects are, what the
consequences are. So there’s nothing right or wrong in itself. Things
are right or wrong because of their effects or their consequences.
That’s that tradition. And what’s really powerful about the utilitarian
tradition, at least Bentham and Mill and forward, including Singer, is
that when you ask, “Well, the effects for whom, or the consequences for
whom or the results for whom, who’s involved in all this?” they say,
“Any sentient being, anyone who’s capable of experiencing pleasure or
pain is going to have to be taken into account.” So what I get from the
utilitarian end is this notion of who counts. Not what makes acts right
or wrong, but who counts. I think the utilitarianans have something
important to contribute.

The other philosophical tradition is Kant, where basically what Kant
wants to argue is that right and wrong have nothing whatsoever to do
with the consequences. What makes acts right or wrong is not what
happens because of what you do, but how you treat someone. So it’s right
there in front of you. And the consequences flow from that treatment,
but the treatment is the determining factor of right and wrong. I think
that one way to understand what Kant is saying is that the treatment
that determines right or wrong is respect. You must treat someone with
respect, and if you do that, you’ve done the right thing, whatever
happens after that. And the way you can interpret respect, the
simple-minded way anyhow, is to say that you fail to treat a person with
respect if you treat a person like a thing; very simple for Kant.

If I have a fountain pen, the value that the fountain pen has is
relative to its usefulness to me. There’s nothing wrong with me exerting
my power or my control over that fountain pen. It’s fine. It exists to
serve me. And its value is relative to how well it serves me. So what
would be wrong would be for me to treat a person like a fountain pen. It
would be to say, “Here’s my power; I’m going to reduce you to the level
of having value in the world only relative to my interests.” Anytime I
use force or coercion or deceit or intimidation or these sorts of things
to get you to do something that I want you to do, I’ve mistreated you,
whatever the consequences. Those are irrelevant.

So what my position really does is it takes this notion of respect,
which is really crucial for morality, so far as I can see. And what it
does is it takes that and applies it not to what Kant wanted to apply it
to, which is only to persons, which meant rational and autonomous
individuals. It applies it to those who count from the utilitarian
perspective. That is those who, with my wrinkle on it, those who are
subjects of a life. So what the utilitarians saw was that there are
beings other than persons who count. That’s their great insight. There
are beings other than persons who count. In The Case for Animal Rights
there’s that strand of thought going through. But what Kant saw was that
what determines what’s right and what’s wrong are not the consequences
but the way somebody is treated. So that what you get in my position, I
think, is this marriage of what I regard as the strength of Kant and the
strength of utilitarians. But it applies to that reality that has no
name — subjects of a life. \[Laughter\].

Hardy: It sounds like sort of merging of the idealist and the more
pragmatic traditions.

Regan: You could think of it that way — which is often the way
philosophy is. See, there’s hardly any philosophy that I’m familiar with
that doesn’t have some truth in it, and there’s no philosophy that I’m
familiar with (present company excluded, you know) \[Laughter\] —
there’s no philosophy that I’m familiar with that has only truth in it.

Hardy: Yes. Okay, back to 1983. You wrote that animal rights movement
like all great movements goes through three stages: ridicule,
discussion, adoption.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: Where are we now?

Regan: Well, actually, that’s a quote from John Stuart Mill. I wish I
had written it, but that is a quote from John Stuart Mill. That’s the
inscription in the book. We’re certainly in the stage of discussion.

Hardy: Do you think we’ve moved beyond ridicule?

Regan: I think we have to some considerable degree; not fully. And
that’s part of the problem with some of the tactics of some of the folks
in the movement, because it does make us look ridiculous and opens us to
the charges of ridicule. But we’re very far from adoption. Very far. I
don’t know. I mean —

Hardy: Questions about the pace of historical change — 1983 or when
you’re working on the book, you have this great insight and this
sustained revelation, and then you really do devote a good amount of the
next — close to a decade, to realization of this in the real world.

\[End Tape 3, Side A; Begin Tape 3, Side B\]

Regan: In terms of the transformation of culture, no. People will say
this and it is true: the world’s a totally different place today for a
vegetarian than it was in the early 1970s. It’s just totally different,
totally different. It’s just not the same world. But at the same time,
there are more animals being raised and killed for food today than there
were when Peter writes Animal Liberation. Then there’s six billion
animals being slaughtered. Today there are nine billion animals being
slaughtered. So I wouldn’t say that that shows much transformation at
all. Things are getting worse; for farm animals they’re getting worse.
\[Pause\]. I don’t know. I sometimes will say — and I’m not the only
person who says this — that animal liberation is human liberation.

Hardy: Which is the argument abolitionists made —

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: — about slavery before the Civil War.

Regan: Very much so. I’d put it: our true freedom lies in ceasing to be
their jailers. See, it’s like, you’re not free so long as you have to
keep a prisoner. I mean, it’s not just a prisoner who’s unfree. As a
jailer, you’re committed to that task, that’s your job, that’s your
life. So in a sense, you’re in prison, too. And I guess what I think is
that there is a flourishing of human beings, human character, human
quality that’s tied up with this. That it’s not just good for them that
we let them be; it’s good for us as well. That’s what I don’t think that
people get yet. I know they don’t, in fact. We still think it’s fun to
watch elephants perform tricks and dolphins go through hoops and we
think that’s fun, fun, you know. And we think it’s fashionable to wear
garments drenched in cruelty. That’s what I mean by we’re not liberated,
we’re in a certain kind of prison; such a lack of even aesthetic
appreciation of the world. I mean, what’s beautiful is the animal in the
wild and the dolphins swimming free, that’s what’s beautiful. But we
have a twisted aesthetic. There are a lot of philosophers — I’ve been
reading Schopenhauer and some of the German philosophers; not part of my
education really but — who see aesthetics as really such a fundamental
and important value. I’m thinking about that. And it is something like
that, that we see things — we have an impoverished aesthetic of the
world, I guess, is what I’m thinking.

Hardy: What you’re saying raises all sorts of questions for me which we
can’t get into now. But just to throw in a couple of other things:
veganism. Are you a vegan?

Regan: Yes, and that’s not that difficult a deal, it seems to me. Except
in terms of taste, it is. I must say that, having given up meat — I
liked it and everything, but it’s not something that I would say that I
really miss at all. And I would say, in fact, that I have reached a
point where I find eating meat a nauseating thought; disgusting. I have
an aesthetic revulsion to it now. But I will always miss cheese. Cheese
— it’s a terrible thing. I love cheese. I love the really strong cheeses
like Gorgonzola and Stilton and all those cheeses. There was just
nothing like it for me. The rubber stuff that they make as vegan cheese
is just horrible. It’s just not cheese. \[Laughter\].

Hardy: When did you become a vegan?

Regan: Oh, gosh, I really don’t know. Many years ago though. I can’t
pinpoint it. But it kind of just — you give up this, you give it up. So
I’m going to say ten years ago or something like that. More probably.

Hardy: Because it’s the logical next step from vegetarianism.

Regan: Probably more than that. I really can’t remember. It’s kind of
foggy. It’s not that big a deal. If they could only produce something
that tastes like a good Gorgonzola, I would be a happier man.
\[Laughter\].

Hardy: There is a Chinese restaurant in Philadelphia called Harmony
which is a vegan restaurant. And they do miracles with tofu.

Regan: \[Laughter\]. I know. I’ve been there. They can make “duck” and
they can make anything you want. Right. Yes. I’ve been to that place.
I’ve been to “a” place in Philadelphia like that. I’ve been to several
places in New York that are like that as well. \[Tape interruption\].

Hardy: Okay, one final wrap up question. It is a pattern, well known for
historians: idealistic young people or people who maintain their
idealism like philosophers, particularly moral rights philosophers, to
become involved in social movements or political movements.

Regan: Right.

Hardy: And then to become quickly disillusioned with the slow pace of
historical change, with, you know, behaviors that violate their moral
principles and all of the rest, and then that disillusionment to sort of
sour them.

Regan: Sure.

Hardy: Did you go through that experience?

Regan: Sure, sure, to some degree. It’s one of the things about the
movement, it’s an observation of a great activist in California, Los
Angeles, named Chris DeRose. Chris is from the Bronx, I think, or
somewhere in South Jersey, so he’s got this kind of Jersey accent. He
says, “Tom, I’ll tell you. You know, people come and people go.” And it
is the way the movement is. It’s like a revolving door. They just come
and they go. The number of people who were involved in the movement in
1972 and 1973 when we started, or 1980 when we got — who \[is\] still
\[around\] now? Just amazing how few of them are still around. I mean,
it really is. It’s a devastatingly tough movement to be involved in
because of the pace of change for one thing, and this is difficult for
somebody outside of it to understand.

See, from an animal rights perspective, the world is so evil. I mean it
just is drenched in evil. You go outside and there’s McDonalds, and
there’s Colonel Sanders, and there are leather shoes and leather coats.
And not only all of that, but people are enjoying it. All of that is
evil from an animal rights perspective. It’s the evil of what’s done to
the animal, and it’s the evil of the pleasure that people get from doing
it. So it can really wear you out, psychologically and spiritually,
however you want to put it.

And then what happens also, I think, is that it takes a toll on human
relationships, because you have to displace this somehow. What happens
very often is it gets displaced on other activists so that people get
all bent out of shape with one another. You know, it’s a very thin —
it’s very difficult to sustain a friendship in this movement, very
difficult. The way I understand it is that sometimes it’s nothing
personal at all. It’s just that you have to displace that frustration
and anger somehow. That’s part of the reason why I think I try to just
keep my distance, because it’s just too painful to deal with people,
because it ends up that friendships get trashed, and I don’t need that
in my life. I just choose my friends differently. So my best friends now
are not friends in the movement, paradoxically. At one time they were,
but that doesn’t work, I don’t think. It’s not just me; it’s also the
case for everybody else that I know. People in the movement who were my
friends aren’t my friends anymore, aren’t friends with anybody anymore.
\[Laughter\]. It’s just a terrible toll. And you can’t get to a level,
that I can see anyhow, where you can get to the point where we all see
that, and then we can kind of restore friendships and keep them alive.
It’s almost like a law. But I think it’s the same with any other
movement that I’m familiar with. Hardly anyone came through the feminist
movement friends, and hardly anyone came through the civil rights
movement friends. It eats their young, you know, it eats friendships up,
too. I don’t know if that makes sense but —

Hardy: Oh yes, yes.

Regan: So that’s why I think in my case the best thing for me to do is
just to tend my own garden, keep at my own work. I think ideas gain
credibility by the company they keep. And so the way to continue the
stage of discussion is to make sure it’s being discussed in law schools,
and make sure it’s being discussed in medical schools, and make sure
it’s being discussed wherever. That’s the role that the intellectual
plays here. The street activist has nothing to say to a certain
audience, if you know what I mean. But an intellectual, a theoretician,
does. I sometimes use the image of many hands on many oars when I talk
about the animal rights movement. The main thing is to know what your
talent is, what you can contribute and work at that, pull that oar. But
what happens in the movement is that people get all bent out of shape
and start whacking one another over the head, if you know what I mean.
They forget about pulling the oar, they start flailing away with the
oar.

I’m more convinced that I know what I’m doing now. And what I hope to do
is the next book. I’ve got a book called The Struggle for Animal Rights,
The Case for Animal Rights, Defending Animal Rights; Singer and I have
Animal Rights and Human Obligations. And what I want to do is I want to
write The Triumph of Animal Rights. That’s the book that I want to
write, and probably that’s the thing I’ll work on next. I don’t think I
have much more to say theoretically. I think I’ve said it. So I’ve got
to figure out whether I can write something a little different.

Hardy: Good. That sounds like an excellent place to stop.

Regan: Good.

\[End of Session\].

Tom Regan

Session \#2

September 29, 2001

Raleigh, North Carolina

Charles Hardy, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 4, Side A\]

Hardy: This is the second interview with Tom Regan. Today is September —
what is today? September 29th. Last time we left we’d gone in some
detail up through about 19 — well, we got through the NIH \[National
Institutes of Health\] sit-in. Then you had begun to talk about the
march on Washington in 1990. But we sort of — there was a leap between
there. So where would you like to pick it up? What background would be
useful in order to get us to the march on Washington? What’s going on in
the second half of the 80s?

Regan: In my life, what happened was I took a holiday from animal
rights. What I don’t remember is whether we talked about this in our
previous interview.

Hardy: Yes. You talked a bit about becoming involved in the history of
philosophy.

Regan: That’s right.

Hardy: Who was it that you studied?

Regan: G. E. Moore. After The Case for Animal Rights came out in 1983 —
another book, All That Dwell Therein: Essays on Animal Rights and
Environmental Ethics, had come out in 1982 — after those two books, but
especially after The Case for Animal Rights came out, I figured I didn’t
have anything new to say about animal rights. I had said what I wanted
to say.

The question was then: What am I going to do with my head
intellectually? That’s when I turned to the philosophy of George Edward
Moore, better known as G. E. Moore. I had written my master’s thesis on
his work, and his work figured in my dissertation. In fact, my first
professional published paper was on Moore, but then I had let that go.
So I thought I will go back there like an old friend. I spent several
years working on Moore.

Out of that period came three books. One was an edition of unpublished
lectures of his, called The Elements of Ethics,\[15\] which was very
important because it contained a lot that would eventually become his
famous book, Principia Ethica; but there were also important
differences. It was a comma in the history of ideas, so to speak, but an
important comma. There was also his Early Essays, which had never been
gathered and collected. Then the important book was a book called
Bloomsbury’s Prophet: G. E. Moore and the Development of his Moral
Philosophy. That was my Moorean period, in terms of intensity.\[16\]

But, of course, I hadn’t abandoned the animal rights movement or
interest in the movement so much as taken my mind on holiday someplace
else. The idea of the march actually should be attributed to a group of
people in California, and in particular to Gwenyth Snyder and her
daughter, Diana Basehart. I remember being in California sometime in the
late 80s — I would guess maybe around 1988, maybe ’87 — and having met
them and spending some time with them. I met them, now that I recall,
because I was working on a film called “Voices I Have Heard.”\[17\] In
“Voices I Have Heard” there is a segment where Gwenyth is interviewed,
and there is a segment in it where she and her daughter Diana are
pictured working in their garden. That’s how I came to know Gwenyth and
Diana, through working on the film “Voices I Have Heard.”

Out of that, as I say, I had this meeting with Diana and Gwenyth and
other people. They said, “It’s time for us to have a march.” I said I
thought it was a good idea, but I didn’t know that I was in a position
to organize it, that I would talk to other people who might be
interested in organizing a march. I remember in particular talking to
Holly Hazard, who was with the Doris Day Animal League — I think that’s
the name of it; it’s the Doris Day group — and, in fact, had the
opportunity to meet Doris Day and talk with her about the project.

Also, at that time, very importantly, I talked to Peter Gerard (later
his name became Peter Link) about the idea. Peter was, at that time, in
the late 80s and early 90s, very active in the movement. He had a group
called the \[National Animal\] Alliance, which attempted to be an
umbrella group for organizations and people in the movement. He was a
very good organizer, a very competent organizer. I had a meeting with
him. We talked about the possibility of organizing the march. He was
very excited about it. He didn’t have to be convinced that the moment
had come and was willing to basically become the primary organizer of
it. I think we were called co-chairs or co-coordinators, but Peter did
the great bulk of the detailed work, which, as I say, he had some talent
for.

I remember going back to talk with the people in California and
explaining this possible organizational scheme. I was concerned that
they might think that we were taking their idea away from them. But, in
fact, they were altogether supportive of the idea of there being a
Washington base, which is where the Alliance was, for the coordination
of the march.

After that, we formed a committee — with Peter chairing it — of, I would
guess, eight or ten people. We met on a reasonably regular basis to talk
about how we might do things and what we might do. We also had some
professional people come in — special events coordinators who had a lot
of experience in organizing special events to challenge us and to
educate us about what it was we were trying to do, because we had never
tried to do anything on this scale, obviously. I had money to buy out my
teaching so that I could spend one semester of 1989, I think it was,
traveling around, talking up the march, trying to do some fundraising
for the march. Peter was doing the same thing under the auspices of the
Alliance. We raised decent money, enough money to put the event on. But
it wasn’t like we were famously successful in doing so. Peter was a
better fund-raiser than I.

So the word went out to everybody, through all the organs of
communication that we could articulate: we were going to all get
together in Washington, DC and march for the animals. We did not know,
except from some faint impressions as we traveled around, what the
response would be. We were hopeful but anxious.

I do think that for me, and I’m certain for Peter and other people,
Gwenyth and Diana and the other people who thought about doing this — I
think for all of us that day will never disappear from our memories. It
will always be right in the front of our minds, because there were fifty
to seventy-five thousand people who showed up in Washington on a
beautiful day. I think we thought — in the middle of that day and after
that day — that the movement had come of age and that people would look
back and say, “That’s when we knew we had a movement. The next time we
do this, there will be five hundred thousand people. The next time we do
it, there will be a million people.” That was the excitement and the
optimism that we all took from that day — a great hopefulness we all had
from that day and the great satisfaction we had in that day. It was just
truly a memorable — and one might even say a beautiful — occasion.

But rather than that marking the beginning, as we all thought it may
have, in some ways, I think, tragically it came to represent the end of
a sense of national solidarity, a sense of common purpose, which is what
the march was about. The march was about bringing all the disparate
groups and all factions together and claiming an identity and moving
forward with it — very difficult to do in any kind of movement. But that
was the hope.

Some years later — I guess it was 1996 — there was a second march that
Peter organized. In this case, I was very much not part of the
organization. There was something less than five thousand people who
came, which was a grave disappointment, and is suggestive of what I was
saying just a moment ago, that rather than the first march being what we
thought it was — the beginning — in a way, it represented the end, the
last chapter rather than the first chapter.

Hardy: Why? What happened, in your opinion?

Regan: The question has to be asked, and I’m not sure that anybody has
the answer. I’m certainly not sure that I have the answer. I think part
of it was that the factionalism of the movement just reasserted itself
with great vigor, so that when we had thought that the march was the
beginning of the end of that, in fact it was just a temporary lapse in
the appetite for division and antagonism. When Peter comes back the
second time to organize a second march, there are major organizations
that simply will not cooperate and support it. There is dissent in the
ranks.

And I was a dissenter, I must say. There were certain things that I was
very unhappy with about the second march. There was a kind of
commercialization of it that I didn’t like. There were particular
manufacturers, for example, who provided materials that were to be shown
as we marched down the streets; that was absent the first time around.

Hardy: Wouldn’t that be emblematic of growing acceptance? Corporate
sponsorship would indicate your coming of age, right?

Regan: \[Laughter\]. You could look on it that way. You really could
look on it that way. I guess what I would say is that, for me, I can’t
imagine \[Mahatma Mohandâs\] Gandhi’s salt march being sponsored by
General Motors or Martin Luther King’s gathering at the Lincoln Memorial
underwritten by Sony. There was something about that that I didn’t like.
There also were other things where people who — there were categories of
donors. It looked like if you gave enough money, you were guaranteed a
place at the podium. Maybe that’s just the way American business works,
but it was something that I found difficult to accept for the reason
I’ve given, given the icons of other progressive movements.

Then there were some ideological problems with how the march was being
represented. This certainly has been a major source of division within
the pro-animal community. There is this difference between welfarists
and rightists that I can talk about that certainly asserted itself in
the organization leading up to the second march.

In the end, I guess what I finally decided was that there was more good
to be gained by supporting the march than there was by trying to
strangle the baby in the crib. I spoke at it, and I was gratified with
the opportunity of doing it. But it was a huge failure, the second
march, for the factional reasons and the ideological reasons and other
kinds of reasons. It was a huge failure.

In the wake of it, as time passed, one of the sad consequences is that
Peter has simply ceased to be present in the movement altogether. I
personally haven’t had any contact with him for years now, and I don’t
know what he’s doing. He was a lawyer. I’m assuming he’s practicing law.
But in terms of being present and playing a role in the movement, he’s
not there. He had great talent, for organization in particular. So it’s
a loss.

Hardy: You would say then that ’90 then is the high-water mark.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: Let’s back up before. You say in the 80s you’re working on
philosophy of history. But then what draws you back in? It sounds like
you’re working on the “Voices I Have Heard” project even before that.

Regan: Right. I think making the movies — I did “We Are All Noah,”\[18\]
which was the attempt to rouse the sleeping giant of religion, to
introduce the religious community to animal rights issues and to see how
they might respond, given their traditions and their tenets and values,
not hit them over the head with accusations but invite them into the
conversation.

Hardy: So what’s a philosophy professor doing developing a film career?
How does that take place?

Regan: The origins, I think, go back a long way. I had done some film
work before. There is a program here at the university that involved
extension academic credit. Here in North Carolina we have a hundred
counties, and in every county there is an extension office. Normally
what happens in the extension office is that these are conduits for
information that is of particular concern to certain commercial
interests, in particular agricultural interests — tobacco, the hog
industry, what have you. But the idea was, why don’t we do humanities
through the extension program? Why don’t we give people the opportunity
to even gain some credit towards accreditation if they’re teachers, for
example, or re-accreditation if they’re teachers? So that program, the
humanities extension program, developed while I’ve been here.

I was invited to participate in it in a variety of ways. One of the ways
I was involved, in the 70s, I would guess, was to do a program on the
death penalty, capital punishment. I worked with the people in media
services to make two videos to be used in two different classes. The
idea was this: I couldn’t go to all one hundred counties for five
meetings for teachers to get credit towards their re-accreditation, but
what I could do is maybe go to one and then have these two videos and
have some on-site person do the rest of the work. That was why we ended
up trying to do the videos. I had never done video before. But it was
very challenging and very interesting, and I’m pleased to say it ended
up being reasonably successful.

In the back of my mind I thought, “I’d like to do this again.” It was a
satisfying experience. So after I had this break after The Case for
Animal Rights, I was able to find some money to do “We Are All Noah,”
working with the same people I had worked with before when I did the one
on the death penalty. These were people who worked for the university
media services. I was able to get the money to do the project in the
summer when they didn’t have anything to do essentially. It was a
win-win situation, even though they didn’t believe in what I was doing.

Hardy: \[Laughter\]. Did you win any converts?

Regan: I think I won grudging respect but not any converts that I’m
aware of. But “Noah” was wonderfully exciting. It’s about a half an hour
and tells a good story, I think, using appropriate imagery and
traditions. It won a good high award. It won the silver medal at the New
York film festival, one of the New York film festivals. It was a great
moment. We were very happy. For a little bit of money, we thought we had
done a lot. I was so naïve. I thought, “Now we’ve got the tool that
we’ve been looking for to open the doors of the religious community.”
It’s a very soft sell, soft exposure to the ideas, not accusatory. The
people who are interviewed in it speak eloquently.

But it didn’t make any difference, I don’t think. The story that
represents reality and frustration is the following. There’s a friend
named Dietrich von Haugwitz who lives in Chapel Hill — actually Durham,
I’m sorry. Dietrich is a wonderful person and truly a committed animal
person. He organized a showing of “Noah,” having invited all the clergy
— rabbis, Muslims, Christians, all the religions in the whole triangle
community, in Raleigh, Durham, Chapel Hill — to this showing of the
video, “We Are All Noah.” And nobody came — not a single solitary soul.
Dietrich was devastated, needless to say — just terribly disappointed.

It was a wake-up call to me — or maybe it was a reminder more than a
wake-up call — a reminder of the recalcitrance of the religious
community when it comes to the animal issue. There are some exceptions
to this, but in general, they don’t want it on their plate. They don’t
want to have anything to do with it. It simply makes the world more
complicated. You might say the last thing, in general, that people in
the religious community want to do is to change their behavior. They
just want to live the way they live, which doesn’t mean they’re bad
people — on the contrary. But they don’t want to change. They want to
just keep doing what they’re doing. That’s what it seems like to me.

Hardy: What had motivated you to approach the religious community in the
first place?

Regan: Several things, the most important of which would be my limited
knowledge of history. What my limited knowledge of history tells me is
that no socially progressive community is going to go anywhere without
the active involvement of “the church,” by which I mean the religious
community in general, not any particular church. When I look at the
civil rights movement, look at the antiwar movement, look at all the
other movements that I’m familiar with, it always involved the active
participation of the church — not everybody, obviously, because there
was a lot of division within the religious community concerning any one
of these issues. But they had to be on the podium, so to speak. They had
to be in the parade or else you weren’t going anywhere.

We had tried earlier to solicit their interest. We did a conference, an
international conference in England, on religious perspectives on the
use of animals in science. This is something that was coordinated with
the National Anti-Vivisection Society in Great Britain and also the
International Society Against Painful Experiments on Animals. We brought
together scholars from the world’s religions — Confucianism, Buddhism,
Hinduism, Judaism, Christianity — and said, “What does your religion say
to this issue?” Some said, “Our religion speaks as follows: So long as
you do this respectfully, so long as you minimize pain, et cetera, our
religion says it is okay to use animals in science.” Other people came
and said, “Well, when I think about it from this particular perspective
and think through the issue with some diligence, I think we have to say
that we think it should stop.” It was a mixed bag, but the point was
there was some conversation going on. Our hope was that when
subsequently the proceedings of that conference were published as the
book, Animal Sacrifices: Religious Perspectives on the Use of Animals in
Science,\[19\] we thought, “Okay, it’s going to take off.” I don’t think
it really did.

There is then a dis-analogy, historical tension here, between different
disciplines. If you look at philosophy in the last twenty or thirty
years, the change had been quite fundamental and quite deep. Animal
rights is everywhere across the curriculum in philosophy. I would say
that there is hardly a four-year college or university where there isn’t
someone in the philosophy department bringing the topic into the
classroom. It’s almost unthinkable that you could do something on
contemporary moral issues and not include the animal issue in
philosophy.

But in the other disciplines, especially religion, where you think that
this would just be, if anything, ahead of the developments in
philosophy, there is this time lag. It’s just not happened at the pace
that you would think it would, or at least that I would hope it would
have. It hasn’t. Maybe it will. I don’t know. But there have been people
working very diligently — Andrew Linzey, Gary Kowalski, Jay McDaniel,
and other people have been working hard. There was a time when the World
Council of Churches was making pretty strong statements, but all that
just evaporated like smoke in the wind. It’s gone, so far as I can see.

Hardy: But the late 80s then is the time when you thought that there was
a potential here and really started to target the religious community to
bring them into the animal liberation movement.

Regan: Yes. It was also the time when it became obvious that there were
other resources for the movement that were not being tapped. This led to
the formation of the Culture and Animals Foundation. Because if you look
at poetry, for example, and ask the question, “Who are the great poets
that celebrate vivisection? Who are the great poets that celebrate
slaughter? Who are the great poets that celebrate cock fighting or dog
fighting or those sorts of things? Who are the great musicians who do
that? Who are the great painters who do it?” You think, “Wait a minute.
There is something. Handel writes about hunting!” But by and large,
these people just don’t do that. If anything, the poetry is affirmative
of the dignity and integrity and beauty of animals, and the music as
well.

Anyhow, what occurred to us was that there was a hole in the movement
that no other organization was filling. You might call this the cultural
hole, by which I mean art and poetry and music and dance and theater and
all that. That hole was not being filled. Religion was just one among
many resources that were not being tapped. The natural thing to do,
then, was to try to create a mechanism to fill that hole, which is what
the Culture and Animals Foundation was conceived to be and to do.

Hardy: When is it organized, and who is behind it?

Regan: It was organized in 1985. The folks behind it, in particular,
were my wife Nancy and myself. Then we dragooned a couple of people into
serving on our advisory board. We’ve always had a small board of four
people, and the other two people have varied over time. Currently they
are Rondy Elliot and Jean Hollowell. The mission has been constant: to
raise money and give it away to people who are working on projects that
express positive concern for animals.

Hardy: So this is a private animal arts council?

Regan: That’s correct. It is a private animal arts/humanities council.
In the past we have supported work from legal theorists and historians,
anthropologists and psychologists, philosophers and painters, poets,
sculptors, composers, what have you. At one time, we imagined that we
would raise lots of money and create a Center for Culture and Animals.
In the most ambitious program that I imagined, we would have fellowships
and people could come and spend six months or a year at our Center,
working on their projects. Reality set in. I’m not a good fund-raiser. I
have no gift for it and no appetite for it either. We didn’t raise the
kind of money that would be necessary to have the Center for Culture and
Animals. But we have a little bit of money. Honestly, nobody gets paid.
We raise enough money to give away thousands of dollars, not millions of
dollars. We do some small good. The world has not changed in any
fundamental way because of what we’ve done. But the people we’ve
supported, I do know that they’ve been grateful and it has made a
difference to what they’ve been able to do. That’s important.

Hardy: Where would the Center have been?

Regan: Actually, there were times when we were offered land to do it. We
were offered land in Michigan — not formally offered, provisionally
offered. There was some possibility I think we might have been able to
have land in Pennsylvania. In my own mind, I never got clear enough
about where it would be — I had a sense of what it would be. It would be
rural rather than urban. It would have ideally been a working Center so
that the fellows would mix their labor, their physical labor, with the
running of the Center in some way. There would have been a library and a
theater and all the great things — hundreds of millions of dollars worth
of stuff. That’s what it would have taken. We have some beautiful
pictures of what it would have been. The responses that we got when word
got out about the Center were always of the following kind: They were
never saying, “This is a wonderful idea. How can we support it?” It was,
“This is a wonderful idea. How can I come?” \[Laughter\]. It would take
some few very, very wealthy people to make it happen. Maybe someday it
will.

Hardy: Okay. Lead me back up then to the march in 1990. You said that —
can we flesh that out? You’ve gotten together with Peter Gerard, and the
two of you are going to co-chair. Somehow you bring in a special events
coordinator to —

Regan: We had a group of about — I’m going to say about ten people who
were on an organizing committee. We met on a regular basis, including
bringing in some special events people who were experts on these sorts
of things. There are people whose job it is to advise people on
organizing special events. That’s their job.

Hardy: But a march on Washington — I think of the antiwar movement or
the peace movement. This is that sort of special events coordinator, or
this is more a Statue of Liberty hundredth anniversary celebration
special events coordinator.

Regan: No, it would be the former. But I gather that no matter what you
do, you’re going to run into similar problems. If you’re having a
special event in Washington, there are certain hoops you have to jump
through.

Hardy: You’ve got to deal with the Park Service.

Regan: With the Park Service and the police.

Hardy: The Capitol Police.

Regan: You’ve got to get permits. There are sound systems and all that.
Where do the buses park? That kind of stuff. There was also advice on
fundraising and timing - stuff that in retrospect you’d say, “Of course,
you’d have to think about that.” But unless somebody really has the
menu, you’re making it up as you go.

Hardy: I know the story behind the march on Washington, the ’63 march on
Washington, and the efforts of the church.

Regan: Yes. I was there.

Hardy: Okay. And you know Bayard Ruston going from city to city and
doing the organization behind the scenes. What’s the behind-the-scenes
that took place to bring fifty thousand people in 1990?

Regan: Peter was full-time devoted to it, because that was his job. That
was the project that year leading up to it, probably the only project
that the Alliance had. So he was full-time. I had been relieved from my
teaching, as I said, for a semester, so I had some time to travel around
and talk to people and encourage people to go to the march. Then there
was written material going out left and right. This was before there was
any significant use of e-mail, so it was mainly hard-copy stuff that was
going out to people. That’s how we got the word out.

Hardy: Who did you all need behind you? What organizations or groups
were you really depending on to bring people there.

\[End Tape 4, Side A; Begin Tape 4, Side B\]

Regan: To the best of my recollection — Peter would be much better with
respect to this question. The steering committee had some people who
were associated with particular organizations. A fellow named Don
Barnes, who was at that time with the National Anti-Vivisection Society,
I believe was a member. I think Holly Hazard, who was with the Doris Day
organization, was a member. But it was never conceived of as an event
that was being sponsored by any organization. It was conceived to be an
event for the empowerment and expression of the grassroots. If the
question is asked, what organizations in particular did we rely on to
help us make it successful, I guess my answer would be no organization
in particular and every organization in general.

What we wanted from the organizations was their help in telling people
about it so that people would have time to organize their lives so they
could be there. It meant a lot of hardships for people to take what
amounted to two or three days out of their life to get there. It wasn’t
the case you could just get there, if you were from California, and back
in a day. People needed time to organize their life. It was an expensive
proposition for a lot of people. They had to fly there or drive there,
stay there, eat there. But the motive all along was to create the
opportunity for the people in the grassroots to be there.

We felt like they wanted the march. Our role was simply to make it
happen. It was a field of dreams scenario. If we made it happen, they
would come. We just had to work to figure out how to make it happen.

Hardy: And it does happen. Last time you said you stood up and spoke
before fifty thousand people.

Regan: Yes. There were fifty or seventy-five thousand — it depends on
what estimate you get — but there were a lot of people.

Hardy: I’m assuming that was the largest audience you had spoken to.

Regan: Yes, by a considerable margin.

Hardy: Tell me about speaking before fifty thousand people.

Regan: It was an exhilarating time for me. I put a lot of thought into
what I wanted to say, and I put a lot of passion into what I wanted to
say. That period of my life, I was given over to passionate oratory, so
it was a great challenge to talk to that many people and to have them
respond the way they did — a great experience, one of the great moments
in my life.

Hardy: Paint the picture for me. Can you tell me the story? Where did it
take place? What were you wearing? What did you see? \[Laughter\].

Regan: The march came down Pennsylvania Avenue, like all the great
marches, and went to the Capitol. The platform was set up so that you
looked back down towards the mall. It was that end of the Capitol where
many, many, many famous events and gatherings have taken place. It
started up by the Ellipse and went around the White House and then came
on down Pennsylvania Avenue. If you can imagine where the White House is
on Pennsylvania Avenue and where the Capitol is at the other end all the
way down Pennsylvania Avenue, the march was so big that when people were
assembling at the Capitol, there were still people — many, many
thousands of people — who hadn’t gotten to the White House. It was just
a solid mass of people going down Pennsylvania Avenue. That was truly an
exciting sight, just an amazing, hopeful collection of people.

It was a large program. Lots of people spoke. I think I was the last
speaker.

Hardy: Did you arrange it that way?

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: How come?

Regan: I just thought that would be a good time to speak. It seemed like
the polite thing to do, to tell you the truth. If you’re organizing
something, it doesn’t seem to me you want to assert yourself out there
in front of the other people who are on the program.

When we were in NIH — we’ll go back to that time. During those days, I
had composed a very simple song that I was hoping would become
ubiquitous in the movement. It’s “we speak for the animals, their rights
and ours are one; we’ll fight for the animals, until their rights are
won.” It was that simple thing.

Hardy: Does it have a melody?

Regan: Yes. \[Singing\]. “We speak for the animals, their rights and
ours are one; we’ll fight for the animals, until their rights are won.”
Something like that. When we came out of NIH, we were singing it,
arm-in-arm. It was the “We Shall Overcome” song of the animal rights
movement. That was my hope. It never went anywhere, which is sad to me,
because there is some unifying song that’s needed for the movement. It
needn’t be that one, but there is something that’s needed. Near the end
of the talk that I gave at DC at the first march, there was a group of
folks behind me who were veterans of the NIH sit-in. They sang this song
in the last few minutes of my talk. As I recall, the last few minutes of
the talk were addressed to the animals of the world, saying to them that
we could hear them and hoping that they could hear us. At the end of
that, it was very gratifying — lots of energy, lots of energy that day,
that moment.

Hardy: So this must have motivated you to move to the next level.

Regan: It motivated me, yes. I was pretty much back in the animal rights
movement full bore for quite a while after that — I’d say for another
five years or so. I traveled a lot. I lectured a lot. One of the things
about my career as a philosopher is that, because the profession has
opened its doors to the discussion of animal rights in the classroom,
I’ve had the opportunity and the privilege to travel throughout the
United States and throughout the world, lecturing on animal rights,
under the auspices of academic departments and academic institutions —
unheard of, impossible, if you think about it. Animal rights at law
schools and theology schools and everywhere? I did a lot of that and am
still doing it. I’ve lectured this year in England, in Scotland, in
Ireland, in Portugal. I’ll be lecturing in Italy and Germany and
Austria, in terms of foreign travel, plus traveling around the United
States. So I did a lot of that kind of activism, academic activism.

But I also have had a period where my activism has waned a bit. I would
say in the mid- to late 90s I didn’t do as much as I had before. For one
thing, I became head of my department, and that took a lot of
administrative work. But I thought it was important that I do it,
because I owe a lot to the department and I wanted to make sure, as far
as I could anyhow, that the quality and integrity of the department
didn’t diminish. I wanted to fight for the department and see that it
prospered in a period where it’s increasingly difficult to do that in
the humanities, as anybody who is involved in higher education knows.
We’re being overtaken by this genomic/biotech/ telecommunications
steamroller. We’re just being overrun by this, especially at a
university like North Carolina State University, which has tremendous
ties to engineering and agricultural and life sciences. That was a
period of five years, I guess, that I gave up to run the department
where there were lots of things I couldn’t do because it was a
nine-to-five job, not like an ordinary teaching job. It was a change of
careers. It was going into management essentially.

But they were rewarding years. I felt good. I’m glad I did that. Also,
I’ve spent a lot of time in curricular development, both at the
undergraduate and the graduate level. This university doesn’t value
humanities and the arts the way a great university should. That’s a
fact. But at the same time, the people in the humanities are the
wimpiest people I’ve ever met in my life. They moan and they groan about
how they’re under-appreciated, but they don’t do a whole lot to change
things, I think.

I had a simple question for my college and my dean, and that is, what is
it that we have ever done for our first-year students — our first-year
students, students who come to this university and declare a major in
our college, the College of Humanities and Social Sciences? What do we
do for those students once they get here? The answer was “nothing.” We
don’t do anything for them. We don’t have any kind of program for them.
They come, and they are treated like any student from any other college.
We get three hundred, four hundred students a year who come to NC State
and declare a major in our college. We’re just talking about a small
group of students. We don’t do anything for those students.

It seemed to me that that was symbolic of the deficiencies of the
college — moaning and groaning about how nobody appreciates them and not
acting proactively to do something positive. I recommended that we — as
chair of the committee on the first year — that we institute first-year
seminars for these students so that every student who enters our college
will be in a seminar that first year of fifteen or twenty students max,
and that they will be challenged, et cetera, et cetera. But the point
is, we’re going to treat them differently because they’re our students.

When I had this idea and met with my dean and said, “This is a report,
and this is what we’re recommending,” she said, “That’s a great idea.”
No. She said, “If you think it’s a great idea, why don’t you get a
grant?” So I thought, “You don’t get it yet.” Let’s put it this way: A
number of us continued to try to explain and put pressure and the like.
We now have a mandatory program where all students who come to the
college have a first-year seminar experience. It is paid for by the
college, and there isn’t any grant to do it.

Remarkably, the rest of the university looked at what we had instituted
and said, “This is a good idea. We should do that for all our students.”
What’s happening as a fall-out from this initial effort here in our
college is the transformation of the undergraduate curriculum in
fundamental ways at the university. I’ve been very happy to play some
role in making that happen. When I leave here I can feel like there’s
been a substantial structural curricular change that’s been made in the
undergraduate curriculum that I helped bring about. Usually you can’t
feel that way if you’re an academic, if you know what I mean.

Hardy: Yes, I do. Actually, before you started talking about this
change, one of the things that struck me, and I wanted to ask you about
was — actually I’ll put it in the form of a comment, and that is, for a
philosopher, you seem to be awfully pragmatic and outcomes-oriented, the
real world.

Regan: Yes. I’ve always been some kind of an activist. If you’re an
activist, you’re working for change so you have to try to figure out how
am I going to get from point A to point B.

Hardy: So to what do you attribute that? Where does that facet of your
personality come from?

Regan: I’m not sure. I guess it would most likely be just a product of
the home I lived in, where the folks were very practical. They were not
social activists in any way, but it was simply if you had to get
something done, you had to do what needed to be done to get it done. It
was that simple. I guess that’s how I would think of it — nothing more
profound than that.

I do think that what I’ve learned from being involved in the animal
rights movement has helped me understand other things, rather than the
other way around. When you present the idea about animal rights to other
people, there is a lot of resistance to it. People like ethics in the
third person. He, she, or it is doing something wrong. Or he, she, or it
shouldn’t have done that. Or he, she, or it should change how they
behave.

People don’t like ethics in the first person: I should change how I
behave. The animal rights idea always is ethics in the first person, to
that person. It means, if I hear it, I have to do something with it. I
have to do something with my behavior if I hear it and accept it. People
don’t want that. There’s a lot of ethical displacement that goes on.
Rather than owning up to my fallibilities and my failings, all that gets
displaced on what they’re doing in Washington or the administration and
so on.

That’s how I think I understand how my colleagues work, these people
moaning and groaning about how they’re unappreciated and the
administration this and so on and so forth. I just think there’s all
this displacement. I mean, there’s something wrong here. There’s
something that needs fixing here that people here are competent to fix
and do something about, rather than displacing all their failures onto
somebody else and blaming somebody else. That’s what I’ve learned. The
animal rights movement has helped me see that.

Hardy: Something that takes place — I’m sure we both observe — is that
for people where ethics does become “I” rather than “he” or “she,”
\[it\] can raise a lot of hostility in others. One of the things you
alluded to last time and began to talk about when I was sort of wrapping
up was — you said that people were out to get me, which I guess leads
into the whole topic of what sort of resistance you met at the
university and elsewhere, or surveillance or whatever else. Animal
liberation remains still a deeply emotional issue for people and
particularly with the more radical wing, smashing laboratories and the
rest. I’m sure you were branded as a dangerous person.

Regan: Oh, yes. I certainly have had that chapter in my life, where
people likened me to Hermann Goering and Louis Farrakhan and Jim Jones.
I was once described as “the Jim Jones of the movement” in print by a
reputable academic scientist who was upset that I was going to come to
his campus and give a talk. There was a post-march period where the
scientific and agricultural communities thought that that march meant
what we thought it meant, that this was the beginning of something
really big. In response to that, their rhetoric was inflamed. They were
saying really reprehensible things about lots of people, not just me,
but they certainly were saying reprehensible things about me. I think
that that chapter is gone. The rhetoric has softened, maybe because the
threat has dissipated.

Hardy: Tell me about that chapter.

Regan: It’s not too long or too terribly exciting. I discovered
accidentally that here at my university there were high administrative
people one time \[who\] wanted to have me dis-invited from speaking on
this campus because they said that if I’m speaking here, it will look
like I’m speaking for the university. They said — truly said — that this
might interfere with their ability to get funding for their research
projects. I saw that in black and white. That’s the only time I saw in
black and white anybody on my campus trying to interfere with the
exercise of my First Amendment rights and the rights of academic freedom
in particular. It could have happened other times. I don’t know. But on
this occasion when it did occur, and I saw it in black and white, the
people who invited me didn’t back down. They just let me come and talk
about animal rights.

The other campuses where people would go to great lengths to disparage
me — that was all post-march stuff.

Hardy: What was the nature of the opposition or the comments? Can you
give me a couple of concrete examples?

Regan: This is from memory. It was of the sort, as I mentioned before,
that I was the Jim Jones of the movement and I was this cult leader. I
was irrational and emotional and a terrorist — that I would come to
campuses, and after I would go there would be violence done to
laboratories and to people; that I thought that I had the right to use
violence to force people to do what I thought was right; that my work as
a philosopher really was just not competent; that I didn’t have an
adequate scientific background. These were mainly scientists. There was
never, so far as I know, anybody from the history or English departments
objecting to my coming. \[Laughter\]. It was just the scientists who
were up in arms.

It was pretty widespread for a while. It didn’t matter what campus I was
going to. There was somebody there who was objecting along the lines
I’ve sketched.

Hardy: So you get the hecklers in the audience?

Regan: I never got hecklers in the audience.

Hardy: Really?

Regan: Not hecklers, no. I often got very hostile audiences, but they
were fair enough to let me speak. Without exception, that’s true in my
experience. There was never a case where people shouted or interrupted.

I do remember one particularly funny experience. It was at Emory
University. I went there to give a talk on animal rights. The talk that
I was going to give, and the talk I gave, was a philosophical talk that
had to do with Immanuel Kant and John Stuart Mill. I get there, and
there’s such a crowd that they have to move the talk from where they
scheduled it to an auditorium, which seats, as I recall, maybe seven
hundred people. The place is packed. This guy comes up to me before the
talk begins and introduces himself. He’s somebody-somebody-somebody in
charge of security at the university. This \[pointing\] is his associate
whatever. They said, “Now, we’re going to be sitting throughout the
auditorium here, and if there’s any trouble, if you ever feel like
you’re in danger, you just kind of wink like that \[winking\]. We’ll see
that we get you out of here safely.” I said, “Okay.”

I was giving my talk, and I couldn’t help thinking about this to myself.
I was leading up to talking about Kant. I kept thinking, “Now, when I
mention the categorical imperative, all hell is going to break loose in
this auditorium!” \[Laughter\]. It just struck me as so funny: what I
was talking about, and this juxtaposition of people storming the stage
after me. “Did you hear what he said?! He said the categorical
imperative! Oh, my God!” It was one of the funnier experiences. \[Tape
interruption\]. I never have had such a disjointed sense of time and
experience as I had doing that. It was all I could do to get through it
without cracking up. Of course, nobody would know what I was laughing
about. Just the whole idea of hell breaking loose in the auditorium when
I mentioned Kant!

But it went peacefully, and there were good questions and good
conversation. I think that for good or ill — and I think for good — I
disarmed people in the following way. They think they know who an animal
rights activist is, and so therefore they think they know who I am. They
think I’m going to be irrational and emotional and impolite and a
screaming lunatic. So when I say what I have to say in the way I have to
say it, I think maybe people learn more about themselves than they do
about me or about what it is I’m saying. At least I think that’s
possible. They have the opportunity to learn it, because if they process
what’s happened, they should say, “I have a stereotype, and the world is
more complicated.”

We were in Ireland — my wife and I — earlier in the year. I had the
opportunity to be on a program in Dublin, a television program, called
“The Late, Late Show.” It’s the most popular program in all of Ireland.
It’s on for a couple hours on Friday night. It’s late, late. I think it
goes from eleven to one. I was there with the host, and we spent
twenty-five minutes talking about animal rights.

The Irish are wonderful people. They love to talk. And they also love to
listen. Unlike in America, what happened in Dublin was a conversation
rather than a confrontation. The host was very well prepared, had good
questions. It was a large audience, several hundred people, a live show.
There were people there who were butchers and farmers, and they were
invited specifically to be there. They were invited to comment and ask
questions. There were also some pro-animal people who were there who had
an opportunity when their time came to say something.

After that — even during it — the butcher and the farmer both said
something like, “Well, Tom, you certainly don’t seem to be the sort of
person I thought you were going to be when we were told you were
coming.” They were very complimentary — not about what I said but that I
was, if you like, a gentleman in saying it.

After that, when we were walking around Dublin, and later, when we were
in other parts of Ireland, we estimated about fifty people came up to me
and said they had seen me on “The Late, Late Show.” Many of them said
the following, in so many words — and some in the exact words — that
they didn’t agree with me, but they respected the way I presented it.
That, to me, I think, is essential to what I think I can do as an
activist. I’m not unique. There are many people who can do this, but
this is what I think I can do along with others — to present the ideas
in a way that makes sure that people don’t dismiss the message because
of the messenger.

I can do that, and I certainly intend to continue to do that for as long
as I can stand up in front of people and speak. I think that my days as
a passionate motivator for the movement are pretty much over. I don’t
think that I’m called to do that anymore — not called by God but called
by my own lights. But to go outside the movement to talk to people and
invite them in — that, I think, I will continue to do.

Hardy: Ever checked your FBI file?

Regan: I don’t think I have an FBI file. When I checked it in the late
80s, I didn’t have one.

Hardy: So even with participating in the sit-in and then the march on
Washington —

Regan: Not at the time I wrote to them under the Freedom of Information
Act. They said there’s nothing.

Hardy: Animal liberation wasn’t considered a sufficient threat to
national security, or at least not your activities within it?

Regan: Not me, anyhow. Not me. It could be that I have it now. I don’t
know. I haven’t looked for ten or fifteen years. I can’t imagine why
they’d be terribly concerned with my activities. I’m not breaking any
laws. If I were — my commitment is, if I break a law, I’m going to say,
“I broke it. Now what’s the punishment?” That’s my position on
law-breaking, which divides the movement a lot obviously.

Hardy: We spoke about that last time. I had another question that came
up. That is, the march on Washington in ’90, you really get pumped.
There really is this feeling that the movement is coming of age. In its
aftermath, you are an academic celebrity in a sense. You’re speaking a
great deal. You’ve achieved some reputation. You’re passionate about a
cause that looks like it’s gaining momentum but from a mainstream and
even religious perspective is still considered very radical and
threatening. Can you tell me a bit more about that stage in your life?

Regan: I don’t think I was ever an academic celebrity. I certainly was
an academic; I don’t think I was a celebrity. I did have the opportunity
to speak in venues that an ordinary academic wouldn’t have, like “The
Today Show” and “Sally Jessie Raphael.”

Hardy: Which I would think in our small ponds of history or philosophy,
that puts you in a different pond.

Regan: It was different. It was different, but it was short-lived, too.
I haven’t done that kind of media work, up until “The Late, Late Show”
in Ireland, for quite a long time. I think we had talked about this
before, that there was a time in my life when I thought I could be a
unifying force and a unifying spokesperson for the movement, that all
the differences between organizations and between personalities, all
those conflicts, could be overcome.

Hardy: This would have been in that period in the early 90s?

Regan: I think so. I think that’s when I was alive with the sense of
possibility that something like that might happen. It could be that
there is somebody who could have done that at that time, or it could be
that there will be somebody who can do that at some future time. But I
think what’s clear is that I wasn’t that somebody back then, and I don’t
think I am that somebody now. Why do I think that? I think it because of
the evidence I have from the past. Maybe it’s a good thing that there
isn’t any one person or small group of people who speak for the
movement. Maybe it’s better that it is so diffuse. I don’t know. I don’t
know what I think about that.

Hardy: Let’s take a break. We’ve been at it about an hour and a half. I
can switch tapes.

\[End Tape 4, Side B; Begin Tape 5, Side A\]

Hardy: Let’s push through to some new areas first, and then if we have
time I want to go back to 1990. One of the things you alluded to or you
spoke about just recently — and I know that Carmen \[Lee\] and others
are interested in — are your impressions on how the animal rights
movement has fared in the United States compared to Europe.

Regan: I think it’s pretty clear to anybody who travels in Europe or
reads about what is going on there that animals rights has made
significantly more progress there than it has in the United States. This
is reflected very evidently when you go out to eat in England. A menu
anywhere, from a small pub to the fanciest restaurant, will have
indications on the menu (Vs) that there are vegan and vegetarian options
available. It’s just a fact of life. It’s not a big deal. You won’t find
that in Raleigh, North Carolina when you go to most restaurants. You
won’t find that in New York City when you go to most restaurants. You
find that everywhere in England. You even find it in Ireland, not as
universally as you do in England, but it’s common there as well.

The same sort of change is evident throughout Europe. If you look at fur
farming to see what’s happening in Europe in comparison to what’s
happening in the United States, what you find is the movement to
prohibit fur farming in Sweden and other countries where furs have been
raised; in the United States there is nothing comparable. Fur farms are
just a fact of life in some parts of the country. We’re nowhere near
getting rid of them. In agriculture, there is the commitment on the part
of the European Community to phase out the battery hen operations. I
don’t remember the exact date. It’s not going to happen tomorrow. It’s a
phase-out process, but it is going to end. They’re committed to that.
They’re committed to ending the veal crate. It’s not going to be
acceptable. The reasons are not always just animal-related reasons. It
has to do with health and sanitation and other kinds of considerations.

But we’re nowhere near that. They might as well be on another planet
compared to where we are because of the financial hold that these
interests have on our elected representatives. Money talks in America
very loudly. Money talks everywhere, but it talks very loudly in
America. In many ways you have the laws you do, or you don’t have the
laws you do, because of who has money and who doesn’t. It’s a fact.
Sometimes you can get legislation brought about because of the good will
and integrity of people — sometimes.

It seems evident that part of the change in Great Britain and in Europe
generally has to do with the Green Party and what that has meant to the
political discourse in that part of the world. There is somebody in
politics talking a certain way, thinking a certain way, getting votes,
getting people out, especially young people, mobilizing interests, that
we don’t have here in the United States. We don’t have a Green Party in
the United States.

Hardy: Well, that sounds like a hole for a practical philosopher to
fill. \[Laughter\].

Regan: \[Laughter\]. Yes. I often thought that what I wanted was what I
would call the Whole Party for the whole movement. I always thought that
there were lots of commonalties between the various movements. People
looked at the differences rather than the similarities, and the
differences became barriers, so there wasn’t any communication or
cooperation across social interests. But I always thought that there
were important commonalties and that there was the whole movement for
the whole party, rather than for some particular party.

I find, amongst young people in particular, the absence and the need for
something larger than their own life and their own future to believe in,
something to commit to, something to work for. It could well be, given
our shared tragedy of September the 11th \[2001\], that young people
will find it in the patriotism of supporting the armed conflict. That’s
certainly something bigger than their life and bigger than their future
to believe in, and I think it will be very appealing to lots of young
people. But it could also be that what that tragic day will give to
young people is another kind of opportunity, an opportunity to better
understand what could be going on in the world that would lead people to
behave that way. How did it happen? It didn’t come out of nowhere for no
reason. It’s got to have some history.

Hardy: Just not a history that people want to hear right at the moment —
maybe soon.

Regan: I’m not a Gandhian pacifist, as you know. I’m not of the opinion
that violence is never justified. On the contrary, I think it is
justified. In fact, in many cases I think it is required. In the case
like what happened there, I am not a person who is going to say, “Let’s
just forget about it and turn the other cheek.” I am not of that
persuasion at all.

Hardy: From our — the last time I was here, I actually left with the
impression that you were Gandhian.

Regan: I’m Gandhian in a sense that Gandhi was a person who awakened me
to ideas that I would not have thought about on my own. “What are those
dead body parts doing in your freezer, Professor Regan?” But I’m not a
Gandhian pacifist in the face of violence. I think violence in defense
of the innocent is a justified response if it’s necessary and if it’s
proportionate. I just disagree with him. The reason I opposed the war in
Vietnam was not because I was a pacifist but because I thought it \[the
violence\] was not justified and it was not proportionate.

Hardy: So you’re not a Quaker.

Regan: I’m not a Quaker. I’ve gone to meetings, but I’m not a Quaker.

Hardy: Actually, to sort of pull this around to philosophy — because
this is one of the questions I did want to get into — and that is, when
you were writing The Case for Animal Rights, you really went through a
transformation in your understanding.

Regan: My thought.

Hardy: Your thought. Any transformations since then? How has your
thought been evolving in recent years?

Regan: Yes. I think my thought has developed in some respects. I’ll
mention two, and I’m not sure whether I talked about these the last
time, but I’ll mention these two. The first has to do with language and
how the poverty of language can itself be a symptom of —

Hardy: Yes, you did talk about that. I think you used the example of
that little thing that peels off the banana with no name for it, and
that if we can change the language we can better comprehend.

Regan: That’s right. So that we needn’t go into that then if we’ve
already talked about it.

Hardy: But that would have been an insight or an idea that you were
playing with at what point in time?

Regan: The last few years really.

Hardy: Okay. Because that was something we hadn’t pinned down.

Regan: Yes. The other thing, which we’ve probably also talked about, was
that, as I’ve come to understand the implications of what I think, I see
the world as overflowing with evil.

Hardy: Which was, I think, about where we left off and was resonating
for me, because since my daughter is still vegan — my son, having gone
to France last summer, has sort of stepped off and is somewhere between
veganism and vegetarianism. But this is very familiar to me from
particularly the more militant of my vegan friends and my children’s
vegan friends. That really is — I think when we last spoke you were
really talking in the third person at that point.

Regan: Explain what you mean.

Hardy: When you were talking about, I think — and I’m paraphrasing — but
you were saying that you have to recognize for a person in the movement
or a person who embraces these beliefs that the world really is — that
evil is all around you whenever you walk into a restaurant or whenever
you pass somebody on the street. So that’s a personal as well as — a
personal statement as well as one that was observational.

Regan: Yes. I think I understand. Yes, I think that’s the case. I think
when I wrote The Case for Animal Rights, part of what was happening was
I was trying to find the language to express a thought for which we had
no word. This was the idea of the subject of a life, which is not
“human” and not “animal,” for which we have no word — not “person” — for
which we have no word. I wasn’t aware that what I was doing was hitting
my head against the boundaries of our language. Now that’s clear to me.
When I wrote The Case for Animal Rights, I wasn’t thinking so much in
terms of evil as I was thinking in terms of right and wrong. I was
thinking that what was wrong was that animals weren’t treated with
respect. That’s what I focused on, and that’s what I tried to argue for.

But the larger context of that, the outflow from that, is what I hadn’t
thought about until really, I think, in the last year and a half. I was
aware, as everybody who looks at things is aware, that there are parts
of animals in your car and in the asphalt and in the carpet and
whatever. They’re everywhere. The remains of animals are scattered
everywhere. That’s a bad thing, part of the evil of the world.

But the other part that I hadn’t seen, hadn’t thought about, was the
evil that is the burden of our choices — not just other people; my own
as well — meaning the following: that sometimes people do what they want
to do and enjoy doing it, and that’s a good thing normally. But when
they do what they want to do and enjoy doing it, and what they do and
what they enjoy doing involves or is a result of or is possible because
someone’s rights have been violated, then that’s no longer a good thing
at all. It’s a terrible thing. It’s evil that people enjoy doing what
violates somebody else’s rights.

So I was always looking at the object of wrong done, not the subject who
was doing it. I may end up becoming a theologian when I get through
here, seeing how the world is permeated with evil. It’s not a cruel
evil, in the sense that people are maliciously enjoying doing it. Often
it’s a — this sounds wrong, and I don’t mean to sound wrong — it’s like
it’s an ignorant evil.

Hardy: Systemic evil?

Regan: Yes. It’s like people don’t know the evil that they do, but
they’re doing it. They don’t see it as the evil that it is. It’s not an
accusation. In some ways it’s an inescapable condition of the human
presence on the planet. It’s not like there are some people who do this
and some who don’t — we all do. We all do.

Hardy: You’re starting to sound very Christian here.

Regan: Yes. As I say, I may end up being a theologian. But what’s
interesting to me is I think it does sound religious. It’s an odd space
for me to be in. It’s not a space that I sought out seeking, but it is a
space where it seems I come to. I come here, having thought through what
I’ve been thinking. It is a very peculiar development, a realization
that I’ve spent most of my life thinking about the object of the wrong
rather than the subject who does it. I haven’t thought about that.

Hardy: Which raises another question I wanted to ask you about. That is,
you and Peter Singer are sort of its Regan and Singer or Singer and
Regan, the two formative names in the animal rights movement from the
philosophical end of it. That’s now twenty years ago, closing in on it.
Within that time there has to have been another generation of
philosophers who have taken up the cause and attacked their elders, as
they inevitably do, with a revisionist theory. Where has animal rights
philosophy been moving in the last —

Regan: There have been people writing about it, in addition to Peter and
myself, for the past thirty years or so. It’s just very difficult for
anybody else to claim a place on the platform. I don’t know why. It’s
not because there were two competent philosophers and the rest of them
are not. It’s just not true. They are competent thinkers.

I think maybe part of it is a media phenomenon. When people write
stories, today the standard thing for them to do is to go to the files
or access some search engine for what’s been done on it before. The
natural thing to do is to make your story build on what’s been done
before. I think because Peter and I had such an early presence in the
file that people who continue to write stories continue to think that
we’re the only people who have anything important to say. That’s not
true, but that’s what other philosophers are up against. It’s like other
people in the movement trying to get their voice heard through the
media, to the media, through the cacophony of PETA \[People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals\]. It’s very difficult. Smith writes a
story today based on the files of stories that have been done before:
it’s going to be about PETA if it’s about animal rights. The two are
synonymous. Singer and Regan are the philosophers. I think that probably
is why that’s happened. It’s not fair, but that’s just the way it is.

Hardy: Do you see any generation taking place, a shift?

Regan: With young people?

Hardy: Yes. Is the movement moving into a — I don’t know what. You would
have a better idea of what generation you and Peter fit in and what the
next would be.

Regan: As I was saying earlier, in the wake of what’s happened on
September the 11th, I think young people have for a very long time had a
need to find something larger than their own life, larger than their own
future, to care about. The challenge is to create the opportunity for
young people who are looking for that.

Hardy: I think what I’m asking more concretely is, within the animal
rights/animal liberation movement, has there been a subsequent
generation that is changing the directions within its moving that is
relating to you differently than folks did back in ’85 or ’90?

Regan: I’m still not sure I understand. Relating to what?

Hardy: To a shift in leadership, shift in philosophy, shift in plans of
action, where the former leaders are displaced, beheaded, as the next
generation makes its mark and takes the movement in new directions. Or
it could be what — is that really you expected that 1990 was supposed to
be the coming of age of a movement which has, in fact, lost its
momentum.

Regan: I think up until 1990, the movement had a growing sense of unity
and direction and purpose. I think so. I think up until then it was a
movement driven by a commitment to a family of values, not only
concerning respect for animals but also concerning the strategies and
policies used in pursuit of the objectives of the movement. But since
then, I think, to some considerable degree, the movement has lost its
way. Up until then, it seemed to me that the animal rights movement was
marching down the same path as Gandhi might have marched or as King
might have marched, that there was an integrity to the objectives and to
the means.

But since then, I think, it’s been very, very compromised and very
cheapened, from running naked through the streets to protest furs, to
throwing pies in peoples’ faces, to terrorizing at the homes of
vivisectors, to stunts, publicity. If somebody is doing something in the
name of animal rights, and I ask the question, “Would Gandhi do this?
Would King do this?” and I say, “No,” then I’m sorry. I just don’t think
you should be doing this. I don’t think you should be doing it. All
you’re trying to do is get publicity. Then you can try to justify it and
say, “Well, we get this publicity, and then people hear our message.” I
think that’s cheap. There is a moral integrity to the vision we have,
and there should be a moral integrity to the means used to get there.
There isn’t.

Hardy: Now you sound like the old guy railing against the kids.

Regan: Yes.

Hardy: I’ve got a question for you, though, because what would Martin
Luther King have been without Malcolm X or H. Rap Brown or Huey Newton?

Regan: Yes. The vision —

Hardy: It’s those people who are undertaking the more radical actions
who gave King — who enhanced King’s legitimacy and created a new center.

Regan: Yes and no. Rap Brown and Malcolm X didn’t run naked through the
streets protesting segregation. There can be more militant, more radical
tactics. I’m just talking about silliness. To me, I think that part of
the reason the animal rights movement has lost its momentum is because
people have lost the moral compass concerning their own behavior.
There’s a lot of housecleaning that needs to be done in the animal
rights movement, I think. It could be that I’m getting older.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[End Tape 5, Side A; Begin Tape 5, Side B\]

Hardy: The other thing, as an historian I always think contextually.
You’re looking for reasons for decline within the movement. I would look
for the external conditions that are no longer favorable to that sort of
social movement.

Regan: It’s certainly possible. That is, it certainly is true that
movements don’t operate in a vacuum. They’re going to be part of the
larger social scene.

Hardy: Okay. We’re about at where we should be in time, so I’m going to
let you go.

\[End of Session\].

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

academic and education profession 9–10, 27, 29, 36–37, 46–47

All That Dwell Therein \[book\] 9, 36

American Philosophical Association 7, 27

American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) 20

animal experimentation and testing 1, 11, 21, 24, 25

Animal Liberation \[book\] 7, 9, 12, 19, 32

Animal Liberation Front (ALF) 21, 24, 26

Animal Machines 6, 13

Animal Rights and Human Obligations \[book\] 7, 9, 35

Animal Rights Debate \[book\] 29

animal rights movement/animal protection community 10–12, 19–21, 24–27,
28–29, 31–32, 34–35, 38–39, 43–46, 51–53, 56–58

Animal Sacrifices: Religious Perspectives on the Use of Animals in
Science 41

Animal Welfare Act 1

Animal Welfare Institute 20

animals in entertainment 25

Animals, Men, and Morals 7, 12

Aquinas, Thomas 7, 9, 14

Aristotle 7–9, 14

Austria 46

Barnes, Don 44

Basehart, Diana 37, 38

Bentham, Jeremy 7, 8, 14, 30

Bloomsbury’s Prophet: G. E. Moore and the Development of his Moral
Philosophy 37

Brooklyn College 18

Brown, H. Rap 57

California 37, 44

Los Angeles 28, 34

Cambridge University 11

Canada 6

Canadian Journal of Philosophy 5, 6

Case for Animal Rights, The 9, 11, 15–20, 27, 30, 31, 35, 36, 40, 54, 55

civil disobedience 21–24, 25

Clark, Stephen 8

Cohen, Carl 29

Culture and Animals Foundation 42

custom/tradition/culture 17–18, 32–33

Dahmer, Jeffrey 6

Day, Doris 37

Defending Animal Rights \[book\] 29, 35

DeRose, Chris 34

Descartes, René 8

Dialogue \[journal\] 6

Doris Day Animal League 37, 44

Early Essays \[book\] 36

Elements of Ethics \[book\] 36

Elliot, Rondy 42

Emory University 49

England See Great Britain

ethics and morality 3–6, 8–9, 10, 13–16, 17–18, 19–20, 30–31, 32, 48,
53–56

factory farms 6, 52

Farrakhan, Louis 48

France 54

Friends of Animals 11, 13

Fund For Animals 25, 26

funding/finance 1, 12, 22–24, 26–27, 38, 39, 42–43

fur 13, 24, 25, 52

Gandhi, Mohandâs 4, 5, 17, 22, 25–27, 53, 57

General Motors 11

Genarelli, Thomas 21, 25

Gerard, Peter 28, 37–39, 43, 44

Germany 46

Godlovitch, Roslind 7, 8

Godlovitch, Stanley 7, 8

Goering, Hermann 48

Great Britain 6, 11, 41, 46, 52, 53

Great Depression 4

Harris, John 7, 8

Harrison, Ruth 6, 13

Harvard University 27

Hazard, Holly 37, 44

Herrington, Alice 11

Hollowell, Jean 42

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 20, 26

In Defense of Animals 20

International Society Against Painful Experiments on Animals 41

International Society for Animal Rights 10, 11, 13

Ireland 46, 50–52

Dublin 50, 51

Italy 46

Jones, Helen 10, 11, 13, 15, 19, 20

Jones, Jim 48, 49

Kant, Immanuel 7, 9, 14, 31, 50

King, Martin Luther 39, 57

Kowalski, Gary 42

Lama, Eddie 13

Late, Late Show \[television program\] 50–52

LaVeck, James 13

law and legislation 1, 26

Lee, Carmen 52

Link, Peter See Gerard, Peter

Linzey, Andrew 8, 11, 42

literature 42

Lorenz, Konrad 4

Malcolm X 57

McDaniel, Jay 42

media 24, 25, 39–41, 50, 56

Michigan 43

Mill, John Stuart 7, 8, 14, 30, 32, 50

Moore, G. E. 27, 36

Moral Basis of Vegetarianism \[journal article\] 5, 7

music/musicians 42, 46

National Animal Alliance 37, 38, 44

National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS) \[England\] 41, 44

National Endowment for the Humanities 9, 12, 18

National Humanities Center 27

National Institutes of Health (NIH) 21, 23, 24, 25, 27, 36, 46

Nearing, Helen 11

New York

New York City 13, 33, 52

New York Review of Books 7, 27

Newkirk, Ingrid 20, 21

Newton, Huey 57

Nielson, Kai 6

North Carolina 9, 40

Chapel Hill 41

Durham 40

Greensboro 23

Raleigh 41, 52

North Carolina State University 27, 40, 46, 47

North Carolinians Against the War 3

Nozick, Robert 14, 27

Oxford University 7, 8

Pacheco, Alex 20–22

Pennsylvania 43

Harrisburg 25

Higgins 25

Philadelphia 33

Pittsburgh 2

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 20–26, 56

Pittsburgh Press 2

politics 53

Portugal 46

Prentice Hall 7

Principia Ethica \[book\] 36

protests and demonstrations 21–24, 25

public relations/outreach 13, 23–25, 37, 39, 43–45, 50–51

psychological aspects 4–5, 8, 12–13, 16–17, 34, 47, 48, 50

Rawls, John 14

Regan, Nancy \[wife\] 3, 5, 7, 8, 17, 20, 22, 42, 50

religion 40–42

rodents 1

Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) 11

Ruston, Bayard 44

Ryder, Richard 8, 11

Salinger, J. D. 2

Schopenhauer, Artur 7, 33

science/scientific community 49

Seiling, Elinor 11, 13

Singer, Peter 7–9, 12, 13, 19, 27, 30, 32, 35, 56

slaughtering of animals 5–6

Snyder, Gwenyth 37, 38

St. John’s College 3

Stein, Jenny 13

Struggle for Animal Rights \[book\] 35

Sweden 52

Therian, Bud 7

Today \[television program\] 51

U.S. Department of Agriculture 1

United Action for Animals (UAA) 11

University of Calgary 7

University of California Press 18

University of Illinois Press 29

University of North Carolina at Asheville 8

University of Pennsylvania 21

University of Virginia 3

Unnecessary Fuss \[film\] 21

vegetarianism 4–6, 33, 52

Vietnam War 3, 5, 54

Voices I Have Heard \[film\] 37, 39

von Haugwitz, Dietrich 40, 41

Washington, DC 20, 21, 28, 36–38, 43, 44, 48, 51

We Are All Noah \[film\] 39–41

Witness, A Tribe of Heart Documentary \[film\] 13

Wolfe, Thomas 2

World Council of Churches 42

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[1\] Ahimsa is a Sanskrit word which means not inflicting harm on
living creatures.

\[2\] Tom Regan, “The Bird in the Cage: A Glimpse of My Life,” Between
the Species, \[1979?\], 42-50; 90-99.

\[3\] Tom Regan, “The Moral Basis of Vegetarianism,” Canadian Journal of
Philosophy, 5 (1975), 181-214.

\[4\] The serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer (1960-1994) from Milwaukee was
convicted of killing 17 young men and boys, dismembering and
cannibalizing his victims.

\[5\] Ruth Harrison, Animal Machines: The New Factory Farming Industry
(London: Vincent Stuart, 1964).

\[6\] Peter Singer, “Animal Liberation,” New York Review of Books, 5
April 1973, 17-21.

\[7\] Stanley and Roslind Godlovitch, and John Harris (eds.), Animal,
Men, and Morals: An Inquiry into the Maltreatment of Non-humans (London:
Gollancz, 1971; New York: Taplings, 1972).

\[8\] Peter Singer, Animal Liberation: A New Ethic for Our Treatment of
Animals (New York: New York Review, 1975; New York: Avon Books, 1977).

\[9\] Tom Regan and Peter Singer (eds.) Animal Rights and Human
Obligations (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1976).

\[10\] Tom Regan, All That Dwell Therein: Animal Rights and
Environmental Ethics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982).

\[11\] United Action for Animals.

\[12\] “The Witness, A Tribe of Heart Documentary.” Directed by Jenny
Stein, produced by James LaVeck, narrated by Eddie Lama. A Tribe of
Heart Production, 2000. Color; 35mm film and digital video; 43 minutes.

\[13\] Two provisions that protect animals were included in the 100
“Liberties” enacted by the Puritans of Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1641.

\[14\] PETA was founded in 1980.

\[15\] G. E. Moore, The Elements of Ethics; edited and with an
introduction by Tom Regan (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1991).

\[16\] G. E. Moore, G. E. Moore: The Early Essays; edited by Tom Regan
(Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986). Tom Regan, Bloomsbury
Prophet: G. E. Moore and the Development of his Moral Philosophy
(Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986).

\[17\] “Voices I Have Heard.” Directed and narrated by Tom Regan;
produced by North Carolina State University, Office of Creative Services
for Culture & Animals Foundation, 1987. Video; 59 mins.

\[18\] “We Are All Noah.” Directed and narrated by Tom Regan; produced
by North Carolina State University, Office of Creative Services for
Culture & Animals Foundation, c.1986. Video; 30 mins.

\[19\] Tom Regan (ed.), Animal Sacrifices: Religious Perspectives on the
Use of Animals in Science (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986).
