---
---

[Interview one of two]

This edited transcript is the product of a tape-recorded interview
conducted by Charles Hardy III with Peter Singer in Princeton, New
Jersey, on January 30, 2002,for the non-profit group Recording Animal
Advocacy

TAPES AND INTERVIEW RECORDS

The original tape recordings of the interview, edited transcript, and
records pertaining to the interview are deposited permanently at
Columbia University’s Oral History Research Office.

Note: The original recording was made on DAT tapes. However, the
transcript was from audio cassettes copied from the DAT tapes. Therefore
tape breaks indicated in the transcript refer to those in the audio
cassettes (not the DAT tapes). Both DAT and audio tapes are deposited at
Columbia University.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical information . . . . . ii

Session 1 – January 30, 2002

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

Parents’ background; early education – Choosing University of Melbourne
and deciding to do a combined honors degree in history and philosophy –
Reasons for writing master’s thesis “Why Should I Be Moral” – Married at
age 22 – Moved to Oxford University in 1969 for a B.Phil. degree; very
little interest in animal and vegetarian issues at that time; society’s
views of SPCAs, antivivisection groups, and vegetarians then – Learned
about fellow vegetarian student Richard Keshen’s reasons for not eating
meat when having lunch with him – Subsequent discussions with Keshen,
Roslind and Stanley Godlovitch about their concerns over ethical
treatment of animals; reading Ruth Harrison’s Animal Machines; finding
philosophical writing on treatment of animals not very convincing –
Interests in contemporary social issues such as anti-conscription,
abortion law reforms, civil rights, equality – Although writing B.Phil.
thesis on civil disobedience, realized that a contribution to the animal
movement could be made by putting together philosophical arguments on
improving moral status of animals – Learning to cook vegetarian food and
becoming a vegetarian – First animal-related activism: handing out
leaflets about factory farming (supplied by Peter Robert’s Compassion in
World Farming) together with other Oxford students.

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

More on first activism on factory farming – More skeptical about
defending the usefulness of animal experimentation after talking to
Richard Ryder – Joining the Oxford co-op and persuading them to stock
free-range eggs – Animals, Men and Morals: in deference to the book’s
editors, did not want to write about animals until after the book was
published in late 1971; the book was ignored by mainstream British
media; to avoid the same disappointment with the coming American
edition, contacted New York Review of Books about contributing a review
– Took a two-year lecturing position at Oxford University – Various
responses to the review in the New York Review of Books, especially one
from the philosopher James Rachels and an offer from Simon & Schuster to
publish a book on animal liberation – In early 1973 decided to accept
teaching position at New York University and wife was pregnant with
first child – Offer from Simon & Schuster fell through but Bob Silvers
interested in publishing the manuscript in New York Review of Books’ new
book series – Explanation of the work that had to be done for each
chapter of Animal Liberation, some more than others, before returning to
Australia for a new position at La Trobe University; editor (Bob
Silvers) was helpful.

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

Continuation of explanation on work for the book – Reception of Animal
Liberation by the public – Lectures and book tours – Meeting Henry Spira
– The book did slowly motivate changes and campaigns to help animals –
Animal liberation movement started to take off in UK, US, and Australia
in late 1970s – Although glad about Animal Liberation’s contribution,
not totally happy at being considered solely as a writer on animal
issues – A number of reviews of Animal Liberation were positive; a bad
review in a Marxist journal; not overly worked up about hostile opinions
perhaps due to equable temperament, which also helped in dealing with
horrible animal exploitation issues described in the book – Projects
after the publication of Animal Liberation: teaching courses; writing
Practical Ethics; co-editing an anthology on animal rights with Tom
Regan – Experience at a television program with hostile farmers and
scientists in the audience – Thoughts on being politically involved and
circumstances related to participating in anti-conscription campaign –
Joining Patty Mark’s animal group in Australia – Britain remains a
leader in animal issues.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

January 30, 2002

Princeton, New Jersey – Peter Singer’s office

Session of 2 hours

Interviewer:

Charles Hardy III (Professor, Department of History, West Chester
University; oral historian)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Peter Singer. Carmen Lee checked the
edited transcript added footnotes, prepared the index and introductory
material except the “Biographical information” which is taken from
www.PeterSingerLinks.com.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

For a full and very detailed curriculum vitae which includes a
comprehensive list of publications, please visit:
http://www.princeton.edu/\~uchv/faculty/CV91802.htm

It is mentioned on this web page that: “The best online source for my
writings, as well as for interviews and articles about me, is:
http://www.PeterSingerLinks.com/

Please note that this is not my website and I have no control over its
content.”

The following biographical information is taken on October 2, 2003 from:
http://www.PeterSingerLinks.com/.

A note on the website reads: “Last Update: September 9, 2003”.

Peter Singer was born in Melbourne, Australia, in 1946. He is Ira W.
DeCamp Professor of Bioethics at the University Center for Human Values,
Princeton University. He has taught at the University of Oxford, New
York University, the University of Colorado at Boulder, the University
of California at Irvine, and La Trobe University. He is the author of
Animal Liberation, first published in 1975, and is widely credited with
triggering the modern animal-rights movement. His Practical Ethics is
one of the most widely used texts in applied ethics, and Rethinking Life
and Death received the 1995 National Book Council's Banjo Award for
non-fiction. He is the author of the major article on Ethics in the
current edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, and, with Helga Kuhse,
co-editor of the journal Bioethics. Singer was also the founding father
of the International Association of Bioethics.

His other books are: Democracy and Disobedience; Animal Rights and Human
Obligations (with Thomas Reagan); Marx; Animal Factories (with Jim
Mason); The Expanding Circle; Hegel; Test-Tube Babies (with William
Walters); The Reproduction Revolution (with Deane Wells); Should the
Baby Live? (with Helga Kuhse); In Defence of Animals (ed.); Ethical and
Legal Issues in Guardianship (with Terry Carney); Applied Ethics (ed.);
Animal Liberation: a Graphic Guide (with Lori Gruen); Embryo
Experimentation (with Helga Kuhse, Stephen Buckle, Karen Dawson and
Pascal Kasimba); A Companion to Ethics (ed.); Save the Animals! (with
Barbara Dover and Ingrid Newkirk); The Great Ape Project (ed. with Paola
Cavalieri); How Are We to Live?; Ethics (ed.); Individuals, Humans and
Persons (with Helga Kuhse); Rethinking Life and Death; The Greens (with
Bob Brown); The Allocation of Health Care Resources (with John McKie,
Jeff Richardson and Helga Kuhse); A Companion to Bioethics (ed. with
Helga Kuhse); Bioethics (ed. with Helga Kuhse); Ethics into Action; A
Darwinian Left; Writings on an Ethical Life; Unsanctifying Human Life
(edited by Helga Kuhse); One World: The Ethics of Globalization; and
Pushing Time Away: My Grandfather and the Tragedy of Jewish Vienna.

Singer and His Critics (edited by Dale Jamieson), a collection of essays
focusing on Singer's work, was published in 1999.

Writings by Peter Singer

\[books / book excerpts\]

A Better World? Excerpted from One World. New Haven, 2002.

All Animals are Equal. Excerpted from Animal Rights and Human
Obligations. 2nd edition, New Jersey, 1989.

The Animal Liberation Movement. Nottingham, 1985. \[French translation\]

The Biological Basis of Ethics. Excerpted from The Expanding Circle.
Oxford, 1981.

Conditioned Ethical Blindness. Excerpted from Animal Liberation: a
Graphic Guide. London, 1987.

Do Animals Feel Pain? Excerpted from Animal Liberation. 2nd edition, New
York, 1990. \[Spanish translation\]

Equality for Animals? Excerpted from Practical Ethics. Cambridge, 1979.

The Escalator of Reason. Excerpted from How Are We to Live? New York,
1995.

A Meaningful Life. Excerpted from Ethics into Action. Oxford, 1998.

Proving the Obvious. Excerpted from Animal liberation: a Graphic Guide.
London, 1987.

Taking Life: Humans. Excerpted from Practical Ethics. 2nd Edition,
Cambridge, 1993.

\[articles\]

Abortion. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford, 1995.

Animal Liberation at 30. The New York Review of Books, L, 8.

Animals. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford, 1995.

"The Bread Which You Withhold Belongs to the Hungry": Attitudes to
Poverty. Inter-American Development Bank. \[Spanish translation\]

Darwin for the Left. Prospect, June, 1998.

Dialectic. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford, 1995.

The Drowning Child and the Expanding Circle. New Internationalist, 289,
April, 1997.

Extending Generosity to the Wider World. The Mercury News, June 30,
2002. \[Spanish translation\]

Famine, Affluence and Morality. Philosophy & Public Affairs, 1 (1972)
\[revised version\].

Fertilization in vitro. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford,
1995.

Freedom and the Right to Die. Free Inquiry Magazine, XXII, 2.

The Freest Nation in the World? Free Inquiry Magazine, XX, 3.

Getting the Facts Right on Dutch Euthanasia. The Daily Princetonian,
April 7, 2000.

Heavy Petting. Nerve.

Impatience, a Bad Reason to Wage War. The Age, February 5, 2003.

Killing. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford, 1995.

Might or Right. New Internationalist, 342, Jan / Feb, 2002.

My Better Nature. Evatt Foundation.

Nothing Justifies Valuing One Life Ahead of Another. The Age, April 1,
2003.

Owl of Minerva. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford, 1995.

A Philosophical Self-Portrait. The Penguin Dictionary of Philosophy.
London, 1997. \[Spanish translation\]

The Right to Be Rich or Poor. The New York Review of Books, 1975.

Share the Wealth. The Daily Princetonian, January 12, 2001.

Shopping at the Genetic Supermarket. \[Spanish translation\]

The Singer Solution to World Poverty. The New York Times, Sunday
Magazine, September 5, 1999. \[Spanish translation\]

Some are More Equal. The Guardian, May 19, 2003.

The Triviality of the Debate Over 'Is-Ought' and the Definition of
'Moral'. American Philosophical Quarterly, X, 1, January 1973.

Vegetarianism. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford, 1995.

World-Soul. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford, 1995.

\[letters\]

Academic Freedom in Germany. Reply to Ulrich Steinvorth. The New York
Review of Books, October 24, 1991.

Animal Experiments. Reply to Stephen Rothman. The New York Review of
Books, June 15, 1989.

Animal Interests. Reply to Dennis Flanagan. The New York Review of
Books, March 28, 1985.

'The Body in Pain'. Reply to Paul Weiss. The New York Review of Books,
June 12, 1986.

Embryonic Bioethics. Reply to Thomas A. Shannon. The New York Review of
Books, November 11, 1976.

Experimenting on Animals. Reply to Adrian R. Morrison. The New York
Review of Books, May 27, 1993.

Food for Thought. Reply to David Rosinger. The New York Review of Books,
June 14, 1973.

Marx and the Giraffe. Reply to Melvin Rader. The New York Review of
Books, February 21, 1980.

Marx and the Giraffe. Reply to G. A. Cohen. The New York Review of
Books, February 21, 1980.

Marxism and Liberty. Reply to Robert L. Heilbroner. The New York Review
of Books, December 18, 1980.

Necessary Suffering? Reply to Michael E. Raynor. The New York Review of
Books, August 13, 1992.

The Paradox of Cause. Reply to Cushing Strout. The New York Review of
Books, May 3, 1979.

Power of Positive Popperism. Reply to Robert Solo. The New York Review
of Books, August 8, 1974.

Practical Ethics. Peter Singer et al. The Wall Street Journal, October
15, 1998.

Preserving the Landscape. Reply to John Rahlett. The New York Review of
Books, April 26, 1990.

Prove it. Reply to George Soros. The New York Review of Books, September
19, 1974.

Right to Life? Reply to H. L. A. Hart. The New York Review of Books,
August 14, 1980.

Sex in the Head. Reply to J. M. Cameron. The New York Review of Books,
July 15, 1976.

Still Powerless? Reply to Peter Clecak. The New York Review of Books,
November 28, 1974

They Didn't Use Animals. Reply to Bruce Max Felmann. The New York Review
of Books, October 26, 1989.

This Property is Condemned. Reply to Peter Wirth. The New York Review of
Books, May 1, 1975.

Unkind to Animals. Reply to Susan Sperling. The New York Review of
Books, April 13, 1989.

Unkind to Animals. Reply to Berkley A. Lynch. The New York Review of
Books, April 13, 1989.

Writings about Peter Singer

\[dictionary / encyclopaedia entries\]

Peter Singer. Encarta Online Encyclopaedia.

Peter Singer. Free Online Dictionary of Philosophy.

Peter Singer. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy.

Peter Singer. Philosophy Pages.

Peter Singer. Wikipedia.

\[other writings\]

Animal Liberation is an Environmental Ethic. By Dale Jamieson.

Are You Living Uprightly? By Keith Burgess-Jackson.

Bonnie Steinbock Comments on, and Criticisms of, Peter Singer's
"Speciesism" Argument. By Bob Corbett.

The Case of Singer. By Austin Cline.

Comments on Peter Singer's Analysis that Leads to Speciesism. By Bob
Corbett.

The Dangerous Philosopher. By Michael Specter.

Duty and Famine. By Sally Haslanger.

Eliminating Poverty. By Jonathan Koh.

The Ethics of Baby-Killing. By Jason Zinoman.

Famous Vegetarians: Professor Peter Singer. International Vegetarian
Union (IVU).

'Insiders and Outsiders' Study Notes. By Michael Connelly.

Killing Stupid Babies. By Jow Lindsay.

Critique of Wesley J. Smith's 'Peter Singer Gets a Chair'. By
Punkerslut.

Singer gets inside the mind of George Bush. By Peter Ellingsen.

Peter Singer Lectures on Ethics. By Zach Goodman.

The Question of Singer. By Morag Fraser.

Singer and Unger on the Obligations of the Affluent: Rationalized
Selfishness or Reasonable Skepticism? By Al-Noor Nenshi Nathoo.

Singer-Index Test. By Harry J. Gensler.

Speech and Challenges. Philadelphia Inquirer Editorial.

The Moral Mentor. By Sophia Hollander.

Who Lives, Who Dies? By Mark Oppenheimer.

Why Are We Afraid of Peter Singer? By Jeff Sharlet.

Reviews

A Companion to Bioethics. By Antonio Casado da Rocha. Metapsychology.

A Darwinian Left. By Ralph Brave. Salon Books.

A Darwinian Left. By Leigh Van Halen. Scientific American.

A Darwinian Left. By Anthony Skelton.

A Darwinian Left. Anonymous reviewer. The Complete Review.

Animal Liberation. By Dave Kopel. Independence Institute.

Animal Liberation. Anonymous reviewer. Elephant Information Repository.

Ethics into Action. By Ian Hacking. The New York Review of Books.

One World. By Andrés Martínez. The New York Review of Books.

One World. By Jack Perry. The Charlotte Observer.

One World. By G. John Ikenberry. Foreign Affairs.

One World. Anonymous reviewer. The Complete Review.

Practical Ethics. By Jörn W. Janneck.

Pushing Time Away / One World / Rethinking Peter Singer. By Morag
Fraser. The Age.

Rethinking Life and Death. By Richard Martinez. New York University
School of Medicine.

Unsanctifying Human Life. By Adriano Palma. Metapsychology.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Writings on an Ethical Life. Anonymous reviewer. The Economist.

Writings on an Ethical Life. By Jessica Polichetti. Common Sense.

Writings on an Ethical Life. By Margaret Wertheim. LA Weekly.

Writings on an Ethical Life. By D John Doyle. BMJ.

Interviews & Discussions

Animal Rights. Debate between Peter Singer and Richard Posner. Slate
Magazine. June, 2001.

Claiming Darwin for the Left. By Julian Baggini. The Philosopher's
Magazine.

Dangerous Words. By Kathryn Federici Greenwood. Princeton Alumni Weekly.
January 26, 2000.

The Ethical Debate of Stem Cell Research. Discussion with Tony Jones and
Margaret Somerville \[transcript\]. ABC Online. August 16, 2001.

Ethics in the Age of Evolutionary Psychology. By Francis Steen. CogWeb,
March 7, 2000.

Ethics into Action. By John Cleary \[transcript\]. ABC Online. January
26, 2000.

Genetic Supermarkets in the Pipeline for Family Shopping. By Kerry
O'Brien \[transcript\]. ABC Online. August 23, 2000.

Humanism Extended? By Staffan Gunnarson. The International Humanist and
Ethical Union.

Is this a Dangerous Philosopher? By Claudette Vaughan. Animal Liberation
NSW.

Live and Let Die? By Nelson González. Third Way. August, 2002.

Living and Dying. By Jill Neimark. Psychology Today, January 1999.

Peter Singer. By S. Barsch, T. Bendokat and M. Brück. Heilpädagogik
Online. January 2003. \[Questions in German\]

Peter Singer: 20 Questions. By Vance Lehmkuhl. Philadelphia City Paper,
October 7-14, 1999.

Princeton's Dr. Peter Singer Opposes the War. Debate between Bill
O'Reilly and Peter Singer \[transcript\]. The O'Reilly Factor, Fox News.
March 26, 2003.

Professor Death. By Viktor Frolke. Salon. June 25, 2001.

The Pursuit of Happiness. By Ronald Bailey. Reason, December 2000.

Sparrow Talks with Peter Singer. By Sparrow. Green World Center.

Should We Breach the Species Barrier and Grant Rights to Apes? Letter
exchange between Peter Singer and Kenan Malik. KenanMalik.com. April
1999.

Audio & video

Ethicist Peter Singer. Interview with Christopher Lyndon. The
Connection. RealAudio. March 10, 2000.

Ethics, Health Care and Disability. Discussion with Adrienne Asch.
RealVideo.

Gensler-Singer Debate on Sanctity of Life. John Carroll University.
RealAudio.

Global Ethics. Talk at the 10th Annual Meeting at the Association for
Practical and Professional Ethics. Realvideo.

Greed. Interview with Hugh LaFollette. Ideas & Issues. WETS. RealAudio.
September 24, 2000.

How Can Values Be Taught in the University? Discussion with H. T.
Shapiro, T. Morrison, R. Simmons, P. Singer, G. F. Will, S. Wolf. April
27-28, 2000.

In Defense of Animals: A Portrait of Peter Singer. VHS documentary.
Bullfrog Films.

Interview with Liam Bartlett. ABC Online. RealAudio. May 9, 2001.

Interview with Verity James. ABC Perth. RealAudio. August 22, 2001.

Writings on an Ethical Life. Interview with Diane Rehm. American
University Radio. RealAudio. November 27, 2000.

Peter Singer

January 30, 2002

Princeton, New Jersey

Charles Hardy III, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Hardy: We’re ready to go. Let’s start with background. Tell me a little
bit about your own family background.

Singer: I was born in Australia, but I was the first generation in my
family to be born in Australia. My parents were immigrants — refugees,
in fact, from the Nazis. They had come from Vienna. They left as soon as
they could in 1938. I was born in ’46. They had been in Australia not
quite eight years by the time I was born. My father was a small
businessman. He ran a little company that imported coffee into
Australia. My mother was a medical practitioner. She was not in
full-time practice at any stage, but she always worked. At any stage
after I was born she always had some sort of shared practice with
someone else. So we were reasonably comfortably off, although at first
my parents had found it hard to get established. By the time I was born
we were quite okay.

They had enough to send me to private schools, which is perhaps more
common in Australia than here. But still it was, I think, something that
they did because they wanted to make sure that their children — I had
one older sister — had the best opportunities to become part of
Australian society. So I received a fairly good education. The primary
school I went to was a pretty progressive one, fairly free. The
secondary school was rather more conservative. It was called Scotch
College. It was a Presbyterian school, although the religion wasn’t laid
on very thick, and you certainly didn’t have to be a believer or
anything.

My parents — my family was Jewish in a sort of broad ethnic sense but
not really in a religious sense. I don’t think either of my parents
actually believed in God, although my father did go to synagogue
occasionally on the high holidays, but more, I think, for sort of social
conventions reasons rather than for any serious belief. I went along
with him once or twice to see what it was like, got bored and didn’t go
again, and was never particularly encouraged or pressured to go.

When I finished high school, I intended to go on to university to do
law, which in Australia, as in Britain, is an undergraduate degree. But
when I went to see an advisor from the law faculty, he looked at my
results and saw that I had done fairly well in a range of humanities
subjects and thought that I might find the law a bit dry. He suggested I
combine the law degree with a bachelor of arts, which is a fairly common
sort of thing to do. But in fact, that’s what led me in the end not to
become a lawyer, because I found the arts subjects more interesting than
the law degree.

Hardy: This is the University of Melbourne.

Singer: This is the University of Melbourne.

Hardy: Why University of Melbourne?

Singer: I think for anyone living in Melbourne it’s the first choice,
probably still, certainly then. The only other university in Melbourne
at that stage was very new. It had only opened a year or two before I
went to university. Essentially the University of Melbourne was just
academically the best place to go to. Australians generally go to
university in the city where they live. They don’t usually travel away.
I guess there just has never been really a tradition of that. Obviously
financially it’s a lot easier to do. The universities are, or certainly
were then, all state-run universities. There were no private
universities. In that sense, you went to the local university, and if
there was a choice, you went to the one that had the best academic
reputation. So that wasn’t a difficult choice.

A bit more of a choice was deciding what to do in the art subjects that
I was doing, what to major in. History was a fairly obvious one, because
I had done history at high school and really enjoyed it and had done
well at it. But I wanted to do something else as well that was a little
different. My sister had a boyfriend who had done some philosophy and
who I had talked to. So that sounded interesting so I decided to take
that up as my second major. Strictly because I was doing an honors
degree, they were called honors schools rather than majors, but it was a
combined honors degree.

So I went through as a four-year — well, actually the combined degree,
if I had done it all, would have been a six-year degree, the honors arts
degree plus the law degree. But the way the degree was structured, at
the end of four years I had completed the arts requirements. I had the
arts degree, and I would then have had to do two years full-time law to
finish the law degree. That was a possibility, but because I had done
well in the arts degree, I had another option, which was to do
postgraduate work in either history or philosophy. I knew on the basis
of my results that I would receive a scholarship to support me while I
did that.

So I decided to give that a try. I think one thing that particularly
attracted me was that I had known some people who were in years ahead me
who had got scholarships to go to places like Oxford \[University\].
Basically what people did was they tended to start a master of arts, and
then during your first year you applied for a scholarship to go
overseas. So that was obviously an attractive possibility. There was a
little to-ing and fro-ing about whether to do history or philosophy
before I finally decided that philosophy offered me a better opportunity
to work on something that was really significant, not just a particular
small area of history that I could make my own and write a thesis on,
but some larger question.

Hardy: Significant in what sense?

Singer: To do a history thesis. To do research in history, at least at
that time, the history department required that you find an area where
you could work on primary sources, that you wouldn’t just be
synthesizing or drawing together what other historians had written.
Since I was in Australia, the primary sources were very likely to be
Australian. (Not exclusively. There were some copies of things in
Australian libraries you could have done.) Secondly, you were supposed
to do something that hadn’t really been written about much by other
historians. I looked at some possible topics, and I could see that
within six months I would be the world’s greatest expert on something
that no one else had ever heard of. That’s the kind of the thing that I
meant by not being significant.

Whereas in philosophy I could write on some major question of ethics. I
had already got more interested in ethics and social philosophy than any
other area of philosophy. I could write on whether ethics is objective
or something of that sort, which is obviously a bigger, more interesting
topic than the history of socialist thought in Victoria from 1910 to
1925 or whatever.

So I did do that. I ended up writing my master’s thesis on the question,
“Why Should I Be Moral?” I questioned that sort of motivation for moral
behavior. I did get the scholarship that I had been hoping to get. That
meant that I was looking forward to going to — well, I got a scholarship
that actually would have enabled me to choose, I think, from a number of
different universities. I chose to go to Oxford because that was then
considered the number one place for philosophy.

I guess having followed my academic career —

Hardy: One question before we move on. So you have an early interest in
moral behavior. Even as a — this is, I guess, while you’re working on
your master’s thesis on philosophy.

Singer: I had an early interest in ethics. I wouldn’t exactly say moral
behavior, because moral behavior sounds like you’re talking about
observing people’s behavior. It sounds like something a sociologist
could do. I was interested in trying to answer questions like, “What
should I do?”

Hardy: Where do you think that interest came from?

Singer: I don’t really know, I have to say. They seemed to me important
topics, topics worth thinking about, topics you could argue about with
people. Even at school I had been interested in debating and argument,
that sort of thing. It was an opportunity to give you a good chance to
argue with people. Beyond that I don’t really know.

As I say, that was following my academic career. One relevant factor
here was that by the end of the bachelor of arts, the last year of the
bachelor of arts, I had been going out with a woman who was also
actually doing history rather than philosophy but had taken a
studentship with the education department. That meant that she was in
training to be a teacher. When I was doing my first year of the master’s
degree, she was doing her diploma of education. Essentially she was
being paid. She came from a background where her family was less
well-off financially than I was, and she was being paid all through her
studies. I had received a scholarship, which meant that I didn’t have to
pay any tuition, but I was still being supported by my parents.

Renata, the woman I’m talking about, had been paid. She had therefore
undertaken to teach for three years following her degree. The education
department could send you basically anywhere you wanted when you
finished the degree if you were in the situation. So, in a sense, that
posed a question which might not otherwise have come up so quickly —
were we going to stay together or not — because if she was a single
woman she was likely to get sent to a remote country school. If, on the
other hand, we were married, she would be able to stay in Melbourne and
they would post her to a school in Melbourne somewhere near where her
husband was working. That kind of precipitated the decision to get
married, so I got married at the end of 1968. That’s the end of the
first year of the master’s. I can’t really exactly remember when I
learned that I had got the scholarship to go to Oxford. I think a little
after.

Hardy: Twenty-two. That’s young, old, right on time for Australian males
as an age to marry?

Singer: Australian males in 1968, you have to say. I think now it would
be considered quite young. It was a little young perhaps then but not
very much so. I think my friends who were of a similar age tended to get
married within a year or two after I did. It was not unusual anyway.

So that takes us up to about August/September ’69. I had finished my
master’s degree, and we left to go to Oxford. At Oxford I enrolled in a
degree called a bachelor of philosophy, rather than the D.Phil., which
was the doctoral degree which would seem more normal certainly to
Americans, I think, but the advice of the philosophy department that I
was at was that the B.Phil., which was a two-year degree, which combined
coursework and a short thesis, was actually a better qualification if
you wanted to be a lecturer, if you wanted to teach philosophy, than the
D.Phil., which was much narrower and obviously was more
research-oriented. The British and Australian doctorates don’t have any
coursework component or certainly didn’t then. Some of them may now. So
basically if I had done the doctorate I would have gone straight into
writing a thesis with no courses at all. So that, I think, is why the
departments tended to like the B.Phil. and told me that if I wanted to
get an academic job in Australia it would be just as good a
qualification, and it certainly seemed a more interesting course to me.
So that’s what I enrolled for.

We moved over to England, settled quite well. I started focusing — for
the courses you do for the B.Phil. you can select your courses from a
range. I continued to focus on courses in ethics and political
philosophy basically. I suppose the next thing of real significance that
happened was a story that I’ve told quite often, including in the
preface to Animal Liberation,\[1\] of how I got interested in animal
issues.

Let me say that at this time, up to this stage, I had no more interest
in animal issues than the next person. That, for most people in ’69, was
very, very little. It was not thought of as a moral issue in any real
sense. You could scour the journals for articles on animals and ethics,
the philosophical journals, \[and\] you wouldn’t really find anything. I
think one article had come out a couple years before. There was no
discussion of the topic really.

There were anti-cruelty societies, like the RSPCA \[Royal Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals\] and there were anti-vivisection
societies. But basically the anti-vivisection societies were thought of
as cranks. Sometimes, I have to say, their behavior reinforced that
impression. The anti-cruelty societies focused really on dogs and cats
and maybe horses. They didn’t talk about farm animals at all. The
general impression that any normal person had was that, of course,
cruelty to animals is not nice, and fortunately we have societies to
make sure that that doesn’t happen, or that where it does happen it’s
kept well under control or people will get prosecuted if they are cruel
to animals. Your vision of cruelty to animals is someone tying up a dog
in the sun without water or beating a horse with a stick or something of
that sort.

I didn’t know any vegetarians. I can’t think of a single vegetarian that
I had ever really come across up to this point. Obviously I knew that
there were such people, but they were rare. I think the best way of
expressing it was that the best-known vegetarian restaurant in London at
the time — I wasn’t aware of this quite yet — was a place called
Crank’s. I asked someone who was living in London whether actually it
was the only one. He said no, there was another place that was called
The Nut House. So you get the impression of how vegetarians even tended
to think of themselves. But basically you assumed that anyone who was a
vegetarian either held some theory about how meat was bad for your
health or believed in reincarnation or some other spiritual belief that
led them to give up meat. So it wasn’t a position that you took at all
seriously.

That changed for me the day I met Richard Keshen, who was a Canadian
student. Do you want names spelled, by the way?

Hardy: I’ve got it. K-E-S-H-E-N, right?

Singer: Right. Which took place after a class that we were both
attending, a course given by Jonathan Glover, who is a philosopher. I
think it was about moral responsibility, freedom and moral
responsibility. It had nothing whatsoever to do with animals. But we
were both attending the class. I think Richard had asked some sort of
question which I found interesting. He was a Canadian student doing the
same course, or maybe he was doing a doctorate. It didn’t really matter
because you could go to any of these classes if you wanted to.

So after the class I talked to him about what he had asked. We chatted
for a bit about that. Then, as it was lunch time, he suggested we
continue the conversation over lunch and invited me to lunch at his
college. Well, you know the Oxford system where we were all in different
colleges, and lunch comes as part of the deal generally. So we went over
to Balliol College. For lunch you had a choice either of a plate of
spaghetti with some sort of reddish-brown sauce on it or a plate of
salad, lettuce and cheese or something of that sort. I generally didn’t
take the sort of salad plate. It wasn’t very sustaining. So I took the
spaghetti. But Richard asked whether there was mean in the sauce on the
spaghetti, and when he was told that there was, he took the salad plate.

So after we had finished our conversation about freedom and
responsibility, I asked him why he had inquired about the meat and
whether he didn’t eat meat. He told me he didn’t. I asked why not.
Essentially I think his answer was, well, he didn’t think he could
justify the things that we do to animals to turn them into meat. I asked
him a bit more about that. He talked a little bit about factory farming,
which I had really no awareness of. It was not something that was
publicized at all. Then he suggested I come and meet a couple of other
Canadian students who, in fact, had influenced him to taking this view.

We arranged for me to come around to meet Stanley and Roslind
Godlovitch. I can’t remember whether at that first meeting Richard’s
wife Mary and Renata were there. I’m not sure. If they weren’t at the
first meeting, then we set up another social meeting later on. I think
perhaps Renata wasn’t at the first meeting, because I can remember
talking to her about this when I had heard about it before she had.

The three of them anyway — Richard and Roslind and Stan — were fairly
persuasive in suggesting that there was a real ethical issue about the
way we treat animals. It wasn’t just a matter of being an animal lover
or feeling strong sentiments towards animals, which was basically the
way that even the anti-vivisection societies at that time operated. They
would give out literature with pictures of cute cats and dogs, basically
suggesting that these are lovable little creatures and isn’t it cruel,
isn’t it bad that we experiment on them. If you didn’t think of yourself
as an animal lover, then that wasn’t very impressive. If someone told
you that more than ninety percent of experiments are done on rats and
mice anyway — and who loves them? — that basically seemed like the end
of that argument.

I spent quite a lot of time talking to those three, and particularly to
Ros Godlovitch. We talked for a long time and took some long walks,
arguing about this. Someone — maybe she — recommended that I read the
only book that had been published on factory farming at that time, Ruth
Harrison’s Animal Machines,\[2\] which had not received a lot of
attention when it came out. For me it was an eye-opener, because I had
no idea that animals were being kept in conditions in which basically
they couldn’t move, that veal calves were in stalls in darkness most of
the time, that there were deliberately made anemic, that they couldn’t
turn around, that hens were in wire cages so small that they couldn’t
stretch their wings, that sows were also confined in stalls that they
couldn’t turn around in. I knew none of this. I don’t think I was at all
unusual. It wasn’t that I had this sort of blank spot where other people
did know this. I think virtually no one outside the farming industry and
the relatively few people who had read Ruth Harrison’s book knew about
it.

This was to some extent a challenge initially. My first reaction was,
“Gee, it does seem like there are things we do to animals that maybe we
shouldn’t,” but I wasn’t prepared to accept that animals have in some
way a comparable moral status to humans. I thought, “Why don’t they have
a comparable moral status to humans? What is it that distinguishes
humans?” I thought about ways in which you could argue against what the
Godlovitches and Richard were saying. I looked a bit at some of the
works of other philosophers to see what they might tell me about this. I
looked at the works of philosophers of the past like \[Immanuel\] Kant.
I looked at contemporary philosophers to some extent. Richard
Wasserstrom I remember reading, Stanley Benn, a few others. I can’t — I
think I didn’t read Rawls yet. I think Rawls’s book was not out at this
time.

But what struck me was that, in fact, the philosophers that I was
looking at either ignored this or said things that weren’t very
convincing. Kant, for example, talked about the importance of
rationality and autonomy and then just — he or certainly later Kantians
seemed to just slide into saying, “Therefore, humans all have this
inherent moral dignity and should be treated as ends, never as means.”
But it was pretty obvious to me at once that not all humans are rational
or autonomous and that some non-human animals have a higher degree of
rationality and autonomy — whether you want to finally pin that label on
them or not — but they have it to a higher degree than some humans. That
seemed to make it difficult to say how we could justify doing the things
we do to animals without our justifying doing them to humans or to some
humans.

Hardy: I’ve got a question for you. This is late 1969, early 1970?

Singer: No, a little bit later. I think it’s late 1970, because I didn’t
meet Richard Keshen immediately.

Hardy: So the student movement’s been going on in France and I guess
England as well. It’s the midst of the antiwar movement in the United
States. There are all sorts of — \[telephone rings; tape interruption\].
There is just tremendous ferment — cultural, social, political, and the
rest. In that context, why concentrate on animals?

Singer: On animals? Indeed. Yes. Let me go back then to something that I
had left out of it. I was involved in that student movement already back
in Australia. In particular I was involved in the anti-conscription
movement, which was part of the antiwar movement. Australia had not had
the draft for some years before the Vietnam War. It had had a — people
who were five years older than me would have been called up for the
draft, but then people who were three years older than me were not
called up. Then it was reintroduced in the Vietnam War — I can’t
remember exactly when, but let’s say ’66 or something like that, I don’t
know — because Australian troops were fighting alongside American troops
in Vietnam. I was opposed to that. You could say that I had some
self-interest at stake. I certainly didn’t want to be drafted. But I
also thought that the war was an unjustifiable one. So I got involved in
the antiwar movement and actually became president of a group called
Melbourne University Students Against Conscription, or Melbourne
University Campaign Against Conscription I think it was. I was very much
involved in that issue.

I was also interested in the abortion law reform movement. I became a
member of a committee to reform the abortion law in the state of
Victoria where I was living. I was also the editor or the deputy editor
of a student newspaper on which I wrote about a number of issues,
including abortion and so on. So I was fairly much involved in a lot of
those things. And during all that time I certainly never gave issues
about animals any thought at all.

By the time that this question of animals came up in 1970, I was less
actively involved in the antiwar movement, largely I think because I was
living in England. I didn’t feel that connected to British political
life. I mean, I could have been, but I guess I wasn’t part of those
sorts of institutions. There wasn’t much going on at Oxford among
students about the war. Perhaps because Britain was not involved there
was less protest than there was in Australia. There was a group called
the Radical Philosophy Group that was trying to change philosophy. I
became part of that. It was essentially part of the student movement
demanding relevance in courses. It was saying that we ought to have
another look at the philosophy syllabus and we ought to be doing
different things that are more relevant to current issues. So I was
interested in a lot of current issues of that sort.

One of them I eventually wrote my thesis on. As I said, the B.Phil. has
a minor thesis. I wrote that on civil disobedience and the relevance of
democratic institutions to that issue. It became my first book,
Democracy and Disobedience. So I was interested in all of that.

I was also interested in issues about equality. That provided me a
context for this thinking about animals that I was engaging in, because
if you talk about why all humans are equal, then you also really need to
talk about why animals are not equal. In other words, if you want to say
humans are equal and therefore have a special moral status that animals
don’t have, you need to say what it is that separates humans from
animals. So for that reason my interest in a question about equality and
the philosophical articles about equality led me to certain things that
I wanted to read to address this question of what moral status do
animals have.

But to answer your question, I think by this time in the second half of
1970, a lot of us certainly thought that the antiwar movement was
important and other issues were important. I didn’t feel that I had
anything very special to contribute to them. Yes, of course, I could be
another person who was part of some protest. If I went down to London —
for example, there were protests at the American embassy in London. So
if I went down to London I could be another person to make up part of
the mass of the fifty or hundred thousand or whatever it was going to be
that gathered outside the embassy. That wasn’t going to make a very huge
difference.

On the other hand, when I started accepting that the arguments for
excluding animals from serious moral consideration were not good ones,
then I began to think that I did have something to contribute as a
philosopher to this movement, because, as I was saying, all of the
popular literature that you could look at, that you could read about, at
that time, was couched in terms of sentiment. We should love animals,
stop cruelty, this sort of stuff. There was really nothing that was
trying to say, “We’re wrong to give animals the insignificant moral
status that they currently have.” There was no attempt to put together
any sort of philosophical argument for why we should do something about
changing the moral status of animals. That’s what made me think that
maybe I had some role to play in doing this. Also just that, as I said,
people didn’t know about it, so you could do something by telling people
about factory farming, about the way animals were treated. In the case
of the Vietnam War, people knew about that. There was no need to do
anything extra to give people sources of information they didn’t already
have.

Hardy: Were you working on this independently, or was this something
that you would present to your professors who were advising you on your
thesis, which I guess was on civil disobedience?

Singer: Yes, it was on civil disobedience, but I don’t know whether I
had started — how much work I had started doing on my thesis at that
stage. I think I did the thesis later.

Hardy: What was the response of your professors to this interest?

Singer: None initially because I didn’t talk to them about it initially.
The first thing that I wanted to do was to persuade myself what the
right position was. That involved going through a lot of these
arguments, as I say, and finding them inadequate in various ways. But
that was really work that I was just doing for my own interest. I can’t
now recall exactly when I first wrote something on this that I gave to a
professor. I started the B.Phil. in September ’69. It was a two-year
degree, so I finished in June ’71. You change supervisors depending what
you wanted to write on. As I said, I did three different courses plus a
thesis.

So for the last two terms — Oxford has the term system — I had R. M.
Hare as my supervisor. I think it was to him that I first presented
something arguing about moral status of animals, maybe about his notions
about universalizability as applied to animals or something or about
equality in animals, something of that sort. So that means that it would
have been — I think if I’ve got this right — in the last two terms, that
is, in early ’71 rather than late ’70. He was reasonably interested and
sympathetic, I think, and certainly prepared to talk about it. He didn’t
think it was a foolish concern or anything like that. But I wasn’t
really doing a lot of work for him or for any other professor on this
topic. If it came up, it came up in a fairly minor way, as I say,
perhaps as part of my discussions about equality or perhaps discussions
about universalizability and ethics and whether that can be applied and
extended to animals.

So we got to the point where — let’s go back a little — I had been
having these discussions with Ros and Stan and Richard, and to some
extent Mary Keshen. And also Renata has become part of the discussion in
some ways. We reached the decision that, well, there is something to
this. So what are we going to do about it? The first thing that we
decided to do — I think this would be, I would say, within about a month
of having met Richard Keshen; in other words, not immediately but over a
short time, we decided that we would stop eating factory farmed
products, so we went and bought free range eggs instead of eggs from
battery hens. We cut out veal and pork, since they are factory farmed. I
think for a while we continued to eat beef and lamb, which are generally
not.

But that didn’t last very long. I can’t now remember how long. Probably,
I guess, we started finding vegetarian things to cook. We got a good
cookbook by a couple called Berg, called New Food for All Palates.\[3\]
It’s still a good cookbook. Our cooking had been, I guess, from European
traditions. The Berg book gave you a whole range of Indian, Chinese,
Middle Eastern vegetarian dishes as well as pastas and other things. We
were enjoying that. We thought, well, there were lots of problems even
apart from factory farming with the way animals are treated, so why
don’t we quit eating them all together? So very soon after that we
became simply vegetarian.

One of our close friends was getting married in Oxford, and we already
had accepted an invitation to her wedding. I think we were just a little
bit embarrassed about saying, “Look, we’re not going to be able to eat
most of this stuff because we’ve become vegetarians.” So we postponed
actually implementing the decision for a week or so until this friend
got married. But by sometime early in ’71 anyway — I’m pretty sure that
she was married in January ’71 — we had become vegetarians.

Where next to go in terms of the animal movement? I guess there was also
then the question what else to do about this. We had now this little
group of people at Oxford. I mentioned six of us really — the
Godlovitches, the Keshens, and us. But they also had come into contact
with some other people that they knew, some of whom had contributed
essays to a book that Stan and Ros Godlovitch were co-editing with one
of these other people, a guy called John Harris. That book, Animals,
Men, and Morals,\[4\] was in the process of production at the time that
I got to know them. Some of the authors were also students at Oxford.
John Harris was a philosophy student. There were a couple of other
people who were around — David Wood. I can’t remember, but I could —
actually why don’t I — let’s make this reasonably accurate. Somewhere I
have a copy of Animals, Men, and Morals. Michael Peters is the other
person I was thinking of. Michael Peters and David Wood were both Oxford
students, David in philosophy and Michael I think in sociology. So there
were a few more of us, and there may have been one or two other people
who were not part of this. There were a few people living together in a
big house on Headington Hill at Oxford.

We decided we’d like to try and actually do something about this as well
as just personally become vegetarians. We contacted an organization
which was then very small but has since become a lot more important,
which was trying to do something about factory farming. It had the name
Compassion in World Farming. It was run by a guy called Peter Roberts
out of, I think, his own house, which was somewhere in Hampshire or
somewhere around that part of southern England. So we got in touch with
him.

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

Singer: Maybe we had seen their leaflets or something like that. We
said, “Look, we’d like to hand out your leaflets somewhere. Can you give
us a supply?” He was happy to do that, and he also said that he had a
model of a calf in a veal stall, basically a full-size stuffed calf —
not a real stuffed calf but a stuffed calf made out of felt or some sort
of material — and a standard veal stall. The same kind of thing with
hens, papier-mâché hens but reasonably realistic, and genuine battery
cages to show how crowded they were. So we got a bit of public space on
Oxford’s busiest shopping street, Cornmarket. It was a little square
next to a church there. Peter Roberts must have driven down in his van
and brought down this stuff. We set up a kind of a little stall and we
handed out leaflets about this. That was the first activism that I was
involved in regarding the animal movement.

Hardy: Whose idea was this?

Singer: I can’t really remember whether it was mine or Ros’s or
Richard’s or something like that.

Hardy: The objective was to —

Singer: The objective was to try and arouse people to do something about
factory farming, basically to not buy its products, I suppose, but also
to join a movement and spread the message. We were conscious of this
being a huge problem, but we thought that the facts were so undeniable
that if we could get them out, a lot of other people would similarly be
moved to be involved in this.

I should say maybe there was one other person who also may have played a
role in — no, probably not in this particular thing, but he was at
Oxford. That’s Richard Ryder, who played an important role in the early
animal movement. Richard was a little separate from the others that I
mentioned. He was a bit older. He was already a clinical psychologist at
an Oxford hospital. He was more concerned about vivisection whereas we
were more concerned about eating animals and factory farming. At that
stage I don’t think Richard was a vegetarian as far as I recall.

But we went to meet him and talk to him, and that made me see that
animal experimentation was really part of this issue too. I hadn’t
really focused on that before. I had thought that that would be more
justified because the results would be more important. It was obvious to
me that we didn’t need to eat animals, so all of this factory farming
stuff was just done to produce a little bit more cheaply the flesh of
animals that we didn’t really need to eat, or their eggs. But if you
could cure cancer by experiments on animals, that’s a much more
important goal than deciding you’d like a steak rather than a piece of
tofu. But Richard persuaded me that a large part of animal
experimentation had nothing to do with curing diseases, so that made me
much more skeptical about the defense of animal experimentation than I
had been before. Not that I was ever an absolutist in saying that all
animal experimentation is wrong irrespective of the cost/benefit
equation. I was too much of a utilitarian for that, too much someone who
judged ethical issues by weighing up the consequences. That was
something that I was before I even came to Oxford.

So that was the first activism. It didn’t go very far.

Hardy: What was the response of passers-by?

Singer: It varied. A lot of people said, “That’s terrible. We must stop
that,” and agreed with us. That was quite gratifying. A few people
argued with us. A couple of people simply wouldn’t believe that animals
really were in these sorts of conditions or that they were totally
authentic. One rather short-sighted lady peered at the chickens and
said, “You’re very cruel people to keep chickens in cages like that.”
Yes, I think we did it a few times, maybe not always with the animals
because Peter Roberts must have come and taken them back at some point.
But we also had some photos, large photos, poster-size photos stuck onto
boards and so on. We did that a few times.

We also joined the co-op and tried to get them to not buy factory eggs
or maybe just to stock free range eggs. The co-op is not like co-ops
here which tend to be things that started after the environmental
movement got going that are anti-packaging, whole grain stuff. The
British co-op actually has, I’m pretty sure, nineteenth century origins.
Certainly it’s very early twentieth if not nineteenth century. It was
really a kind of socialist enterprise, a sort of idea of creating a
marketing institution where the employees would all be members and
shareholders. It had a chain of retail stores, including food stores.
Basically you would find a co-op in every major town in England, so it
was quite significant. But it had totally lost its socialist idealism.
When you walk into it, it felt exactly like any kind of retail store
except there were little signs up saying, “Join the co-op and then you
get dividends,” so that every purchase you make you get some part of. Of
course, you get an infinitesimally small part of it. Maybe there was a
little discount for co-op members, too, as well. I can’t remember.

Still somewhere — and I also don’t know where — the idea came to us that
if we joined the co-op then we would have the right to vote on things
that they do. I remember several of us joined, and we went along to a
meeting of the Oxford co-op group. We suggested this resolution that the
co-op stock free range eggs. People were quite nice to us. We were then
in our early twenties, and we were the youngest people there by thirty
of forty years, because the thing had really — there were a few Labour
people who were sort of still involved in it but not much. So they said,
“How nice it is to see some young faces.” They made all sorts of
technical objections about how would we do this and all the rest of it.
In the end I think they agreed to pass the motion up along to the next
level of governance in the co-op. I don’t know whatever happened to it.
Certainly free range eggs did not instantly become available at the
co-op, but I think they were available at the co-op by the time I left
England two years later. Now every major retailer stocks free range
eggs.

Those were the sorts of things that we did at that stage. But now we
need to get to the point of writing Animal Liberation, I guess. That
came about in the following way. As I’ve said, Stan and Ros, together
with John Harris, were editing this book, Animals, Men, and Morals. I
had the feeling, I suppose, that I would like to write something on this
topic, but I didn’t want to write something that was going to preempt
what they were doing. As well as editing this book, Roslind Godlovitch
also was planning to work on a book herself about the moral status of
animals. Incidentally, Stan was the graduate student at Oxford. Roslind
was simply there as his wife. She wasn’t enrolled as a student. But she
was very smart and she had read a lot of philosophy journals relating to
this animal topic once she got interested in it, and she knew the
philosophical literature on animals very well. But she wasn’t by
training a philosopher.

So although this was an exciting issue and I thought an interesting one,
I decided in deference to Ros in particular not to write anything on it.
So I went all through 1971, all through 1972, I didn’t write anything
about animals. Then at some point, I think it must have been — when did
this book come out? This has a 1971 date mark on it. I don’t know
whether this came — maybe it came out late in ’71. I’m not sure.

But at some point, perhaps in ’72, the book came out and it became
apparent that it was not going to produce the response that we all hoped
it would. We had thought, here is a collection of essays basically
suggesting radical changes in the way we ought to treat animals. Some of
the essays are philosophical, some of them are factual, giving accounts
of experimentation, Richard Ryder writing on experiments on animals,
Ruth Harrison on factory farming, some moral arguments as well.\[5\] We
thought this is going to create a bit of controversy and maybe will lead
more people to think about the issue. Nothing happened. The book was
ignored by all the mainstream media.

Hardy: No reviews?

Singer: As far as I can remember, it got no reviews at all in any
British newspaper or reasonably popular magazine, something like New
Statesman or whatever which was then a popular intellectual magazine. I
don’t think it got any reviews. It got a one-paragraph notice in
something like the Sunday Times or the Observer. I can’t remember which,
but one of the major Sundays carried this little one-paragraph note,
just telling people the book existed. That was it, and it was very
disappointing. It obviously — with that lack of publicity it wasn’t
selling well either. It didn’t really get any attention. That was a big
disappointment.

At some point Ros told me that the book was going to be published in the
United States, despite the lack of response in England. Taplinger had
agreed to sign to publish it in the United States, so that was cheering.
At that point, I conceived the idea of trying to make sure that the book
did get taken seriously in the United States. In order to do that, I
thought I would try to get it reviewed in the New York Review of Books,
which was the obvious place for a serious discussion. It was the radical
journal in the United States that people read. Everyone read it. I was
reading it in England. It regularly contained all the best stuff on the
Vietnam War, on black liberation, women’s liberation, gay liberation.
All of those things were covered. It seemed like the obvious spot.

So I wrote to the editor, Robert Silvers, whom I had had no contact with
at all, saying that this book was going to be published, that I thought
it was an important book for the following reasons and maybe gave a
paragraph or two about why I thought this book was arguing for a kind of
revolution in our thinking about animals, and that they ought to review
it and saying that I’d be happy to do so if they wished.

I should say that by this time I had finished my degree, as I said, in
June of ’71. Because I had done well in the degree and the examiners and
my professors liked what I had done, I was asked at some stage if I was
interested in taking a junior teaching position at Oxford. After talking
it over with Renata, I said yes, obviously. Teaching at Oxford
University would be a great thing to do, and we liked being at Oxford so
we liked the idea of staying on a little longer. So I was given this
thing called a Radcliffe lectureship, which was a two-year position
replacing John Mackie who was a philosopher who was given leave for two
years. More senior academics applied for these fellowships, and the
nature of the fellowship was that if you got it, then you would be
relieved of your teaching duties so that you could do pure research for
two years while some junior person took over your teaching duties. So
that was my role, teaching the classes — or the college teaching anyway,
not the university lectures but the college tutoring really — that John
Mackie would have been teaching.

So by this time when I was writing to Bob Silvers — I took that up in
the fall of ’71, I guess, September or October of ’71. By the time I was
writing to Bob Silvers, whenever this was — I thought it was ’72; I’m
pretty sure it was ’72 — I was able to write on University College
letterhead, which I think made a difference of seniority. I wasn’t just
a student.

Hardy: I was going to say, it sounds like fairly forward for a guy still
in his early twenties to be sending off a letter to the New York Review
of Books saying, “I’m willing to review this book that’s not yet
published for you.”

Singer: Maybe. Maybe a little bit. But it seemed worth a try. What can
you do? He can only ignore it. That was always my view. I did have a
couple of publications by this stage, too. My first publications came
out in ’71, ’72. I had a little note in Analysis. I had an article in
Philosophy and Public Affairs. Maybe I referred to the fact that I had
had a couple of things published.

Anyway, Silvers wrote back in a guarded sort of way, saying, “Well, this
does sound quite interesting, but we can’t really promise to publish
anything until we’ve seen it. Why don’t you send me what you would like
to write in something like three thousand words, and we’ll see.” That
was enough encouragement, obviously, and I did write the piece that
later became the first piece of mine called “Animal Liberation” that was
published in the New York Review. I think it was April 5th, ’73. It took
a while before it was published actually. After I sent it in, Silvers
accepted it fairly quickly, I think, made some revisions but didn’t take
very long in saying, yes, he liked it and he wanted to use it. But then
it took months and months before it was published. Naturally I was
eagerly anticipating its publication to see what impact it would have,
but it took a long time. If you work back from that — as I said, I’m
sure I wrote I wrote it sometime in ’72, but I can’t quite remember
when.

So that was published in April. The New York Review did get quite a lot
of response, letters that they forwarded to me, some for publication, I
think one or two for publication. I can’t remember exactly what. But
quite a lot that they didn’t publish. There were some that were critical
but for reasons I thought weren’t very serious ones. There were two that
were significant. One was from a philosopher called James Rachels who at
this stage I did not know, though I knew who he was because he edited an
anthology called Moral Problems, which was one of the first anthologies
in applied ethics.\[6\] Rachels’s letter was significant because he
said, “I used to think that there was some way in which we could justify
the difference we make between humans and animals, but after reading
your review essay, I now think there probably isn’t.” So here was
someone who seems to have been persuaded on the basis of what I had
written and someone who was already a reasonably significant
philosopher. That was really encouraging in terms of the power of the
arguments I was putting forward to change people’s minds.

The second letter was from an editor at Simon & Schuster, whose first
name was Elizabeth, but I don’t actually remember her second name now,
saying something like, “I loved your article. I think this would be a
great idea for a book. What do you think?” I thought about that. I was
still a little bit restrained by the idea that Ros was supposed to be
writing this book, but I thought it over. I thought, “She’s been working
on this for quite a long time, and I haven’t really even seen anything
that she had written.” She had written one article which got published
in Philosophy, but that was some time ago. I really wasn’t sure when
this book was going to appear or, indeed, if it was going to appear. In
a sense, that has proved right, because it hasn’t appeared.

So in that sense, given that this is really an urgent moral issue and
given that all the time we’re waiting there are all these animals just
suffering quite unjustifiably, I felt really that I ought to take up
this suggestion of writing a book. I felt this was a way of reaching a
wider audience and would be a good thing to do. So I wrote back saying
that I was interested in doing that.

At this stage another thing had happened in my career. We’re now talking
about early ’73. My two-year position was ending in the middle of ’73.
The question was what to do next. I had various offers by this stage. I
could have got a different similar two-year position in another Oxford
college. That was quite attractive in one way. I could have stayed on in
Oxford, but it was like remaining at the same level that I was at, and
who would know what would happen at the end of it, whether I would ever
get a permanent position at Oxford? If I wanted one or not. When we left
for England we had the idea that we would come back in two years, and
then I got a two-year position. We said we’d come back in four years. We
were still planning to come back to Australia. Both my wife’s parents
and my parents were alive. We both had siblings there. By early ’73 my
wife was pregnant with our first child. We were planning to have a
family, and she was born in August. She must have been conceived at the
end of ’72. So we thought, we want our children to grow up in Australia
with grandparents and so on, so we were planning to come back.

But I had two other offers apart from the Oxford one that were
attractive. One was for a three-year temporary position at Johns Hopkins
\[University\], and the other was for possibly one-year, possibly
three-year, visiting position at NYU \[New York University\]. After
talking to a couple of people — I remember talking particularly to Derek
Parfit, who is an Oxford philosopher who I knew quite well and admired
and had spent time in the States. The idea of going to New York became
attractive. Initially it wasn’t all that attractive because what you
heard about New York was that it was a dangerous place to live, that
services were very poor, the city was in decline, and it wasn’t all that
great. Those who had been there knew that it wasn’t really all that bad
and there are actually a lot of exciting things going on. It was a very
exciting place to be. Essentially Derek’s view was if you have a choice
of living in New York or Baltimore, you would definitely want to go and
live in New York.

So we decided to take the NYU position. I knew at this stage that I was
going to be in New York from August or September or something like that.
I wrote back to Elizabeth whatever-her-name-was at Simon & Schuster
saying, “Okay, I am interested in this, and I’ll be coming to New York
in September. What should I do in the meantime?” She said, “Why don’t
you produce an outline and a sample chapter? Then when you get to New
York in September, we’ll take a look at it. If we like it, we’ll give
you a contract to write the book.” Once my teaching had finished, I
started working on that outline and sample chapter, which basically
means part of June, July, August ’73, interrupted by the birth of our
child.

I got to New York and contacted Simon & Schuster and said, “I’ve got
this chapter now” and was told that that editor no longer worked at
Simon & Schuster, and I don’t remember getting any information about
where she had gone. So I said, “Is there someone else you can put me on
to?” They said, “All right, you can speak to so-and-so.” I told them
what had happened. He said, “Well, send it in.” So I sent it in and got
a note back saying, “Sorry, this isn’t really the sort of thing we’re
interested in.”

Around this time I had also let Bob Silvers know that I was in New York.
I don’t know whether after writing “Animal Liberation” and before
getting to New York he had already asked me to do something else. He
might have. I could check my CV as to when the next thing I wrote for
them was. But anyway, I told him I was coming to New York and taking
this position at NYU, so he said, “Give me a call when you get there and
we’ll have lunch.” So we talked about other things I might write for the
New York Review.

I also then said to him, “Could you recommend a literary agent for me?”
He said, “Why do you want a literary agent?” I told him the story about
this offer that had come after I had published the “Animal Liberation”
piece and how that had fallen through, and so I thought I needed a
literary agent to find someone who was interested in publishing it. He
said, “Well, you know, I thought the article was really an interesting
idea. We’re just starting to think about publishing books, particularly
books that derive from articles that we’ve published.” They had
published one or two books at that stage. They had published a book
called, I think, The Second Oswald about how there was another Lee
Harvey or another assassin of JFK, which was something that Silvers was
fascinated by, that whole topic, and he was definitely a believer in a
conspiracy. I think they had published a book by, I don’t know, a book
about de-schooling or something like that, maybe one of those books by
Ilitch \[phonetic\] or something like that. I can’t remember exactly.

So they certainly weren’t a big publisher, but they were really a good
name. He said they would distribute through Random House. It was the
publisher that Jason Epstein was with, because he was the part of the
group that had set up the New York Review, so they had close links with
him. Anyway, it was going to have reasonable distribution.

I said, “Fine.” We worked out a deal. Of course, the first year I was
fairly busy teaching these courses at NYU. But the NYU position, it had
rapidly become apparent, was only going to be a one-year position. When
I took it, as I said, it was one-year, possibly renewable. But NYU was
in serious financial strife. It had just sold its uptown campus and it
was letting people go all over the place. They made it clear that there
was no way my appointment could be renewed. They were in contracting
mode. So I had this one-year appointment.

I also had had an invitation to apply for a job at a new university that
had recently been started in Melbourne. So that was a way of getting
back and, as I said, having our children where our families were and so
on. We decided to take that. But the Australian academic year begins
after the Australian summer, so I was going to have time after teaching
finished in June, basically from then until Christmas, to work without
any distractions. I said to Bob Silvers that if he could give me a bit
of an advance that we could live on, I could write the book then.

That’s essentially what happened. I mean, I did some more work on it
during the year. I know I had chapter five, “The History of Speciesism”
chapter. That was a sample chapter I sent to Simon & Schuster. I had
chapter one, the introduction, basically written. Most of what I did in
New York was chapters two and three, the long chapters on vivisection or
animal experimentation and factory farming. So during that summer Renata
went back to England to see friends for quite a lot of the summer. I
really worked pretty hard on those two chapters.

I had some assistance from an animal group called United Action for
Animals in getting information on experimentation. On the farming issue,
I mostly worked out of the New York Public Library looking at farming
journals to see how they described the conditions.

\[End Tape 1, Side B; Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Singer: This is essentially the same technique Ruth Harrison used. She
quoted a lot from farming journals.

But I also arranged to go and see some farms through a guy called Jim
Mason, who I can’t remember exactly how I met. I think he was then
working for Friends of Animals, which was another organization. He was
one of the very few people interested in factory farming. So we arranged
to go and see some farms, which was a lot easier then than it would be
now. We just called up and said that we were interested in writing an
article on new farming techniques, which was not false, but we didn’t
say we were interested in writing articles on the cruelty to animals
involved in new farming techniques. We just said we were interested in
new techniques.

So the farmers were very open to showing us over the systems. They kept
talking about how efficient they were and how much money they saved on
not having to pay so many other workers and so on and how much easier to
clean this system was. So they told us a lot about it. They didn’t say
very much about the animals. Occasionally we would try to ask tentative
questions and got varying answers. Some people basically brushed it off
and said, “Oh, they’re okay. They’re still producing.” Some people said
— I remember certainly one egg producer said, “Look, it’s true. It’s not
like it used to be. I used to” — he was an older guy. “I used to have
birds running around in fields, and that was really farming. I don’t
really feel I’m a farmer now. I don’t have any relationship with animals
at all. But you can’t make a living the other way.” That was it, pure
and simple. Competition had put those people out of business.

Hardy: Where were these farms that you visited?

Singer: You can probably check from the chapter of Animal Liberation —
upstate New York, I’m not sure how far upstate but certainly up out of
the city a bit for the egg farms. I’m pretty sure we visited a veal farm
in Connecticut. I can’t remember exactly where else, but they weren’t
far away. We didn’t fly to Nebraska or anywhere like that.

So that was basically where that came from. I spent the rest of the time
writing the more philosophical chapters. The deadline was to get it
finished before I went back to Australia, which we were doing, I think,
around Christmas, maybe just before Christmas or something like that. I
worked pretty hard on it and just made it. I gave the manuscript to Bob
Silvers the day before we left.

Hardy: About six months.

Singer: Well, six months full-time, or probably seven months, I guess. I
can’t remember when NYU’s year ends, but probably some of June anyway, I
would think.

Hardy: Isn’t that an awfully short amount of time to be able to put
together a book?

Singer: Yes, it is. I think it is. It was a pretty intense period of
work. It’s not the whole book, remember. I had been thinking about it
since the middle of ’73, so I had been thinking about it for a year
earlier, a whole year. I had written one substantial chapter, chapter
five. The main philosophical ideas of the argument were already in the
New York Review piece, and by the time I came to New York that had been
turned into chapter one. So really what did I have left to write? I had,
as I said, those two long factual chapters. But I find factual material,
if you’ve got the documents there, you’re summarizing other documents.
You can write fairly quickly. It’s quicker than writing philosophical
stuff. Chapter four, which is about becoming a vegetarian, which is
partly factual — I had to get out a bit of nutrition information to
prove to people that they weren’t going to do any harm to their health.
A lot of people thought they were at that time.

Hardy: Still do.

Singer: Still do, some of them. I also produced some — I also went into
the environmental arguments for being a vegetarian. So there is a bit
more research to do on that. Chapter five was the historical chapter;
that was done. Chapter six is kind of a rebuttal of objections, so that
had to be written as well. Then there was an appendix where we put in
some of our favorite recipes so that people could see what they could
cook as vegetarians. I listed a few organizations. That was basically
it. Yes, it was a lot of work. Yes, it was pretty quick. But when you
think about what was already done and the nature of what was remaining,
it’s not a sort of superhuman effort at all to get that done.

Hardy: Did the publishers want any changes?

Singer: Bob Silvers is a very detailed editor. What he does is — and
this was true with every piece that I did for the New York Review as
well — he goes over it sentence by sentence and saying, “Are your
thoughts clear here? Is there some ambiguity here? Could you express
this better?” So I’m sure there were dozens or hundreds of those sorts
of comments. There was some, I think, sort of things like, “Well, don’t
you need to deal with this objection? Or what would you say to someone
who said that?” There was a bit of that. As far as I remember, there
were no major changes that he wanted. I can’t recall any.

Hardy: So you had a sympathetic editor who wasn’t going to request
wholesale changes or argue with you about conclusions.

Singer: That’s right.

Hardy: You didn’t face some of the problems that authors do.

Singer: I think that’s pretty accurate. I think he was sympathetic. He
did a good job. He tried to get my thoughts to come out more clearly and
so on, but that was really what he saw his role as.

Hardy: Before we get you back to Australia, I noticed in the preface to
Animal Liberation that you were going to universities, I guess, up and
down the east coast and elsewhere and giving talks. Were these about
Animal Liberation?

Singer: Some were, not all of them. But, yes, I did. I gave what was
essentially the first chapter. I gave \[it\] as a talk at a couple of
places. I gave it at Brockport, State University of New York at
Brockport, where it was published in a little thing called Philosophical
Exchange that no longer exists. I probably gave it at some other places.
I can’t remember, but if it says in the preface that I gave it there
then that’s probably what I gave.

I did some other stuff as well. I wasn’t only doing that. I did — well,
there’s a brief remark in the first chapter, a few paragraphs, about
killing, because basically the book — basically it’s pushing that issue
aside, saying, “I’m not really here concerned about the wrongness of
killing animals. That might be different from the wrongness of
inflicting suffering or harming their interests in various other ways
where their interests are more strictly comparable to ours.” But I did
write a paper called “Unsanctifying Human Life” during that period,
which I read at a conference at Brown University, which later grew into
things that I wrote in Practical Ethics and Rethinking Life and
Death.\[7\]

Hardy: What was the American response to your research, both at NYU and
when you went to give presentations?

Singer: One other thing that I should say just before I answer that
question is, I was asked to give an adult education course, a continuing
ed course, at NYU. I did that. I used the entire draft. I must have done
that in the fall of ’74, because I basically did six classes, one on
each chapter. That class was significant particularly because Henry
Spira came along. That’s where I first met him. But also I got some very
useful feedback from people in that class and other contacts, because
some of them were already in animal groups of one sort or another.

What was the general reaction? I got some argument, but I didn’t get
argument that I felt I couldn’t meet. I did get quite a few people who
said they thought the argument was right. Not all of them immediately
became vegetarians, but it was enough to be encouraging that this could
persuade people, could lead people to change their views.

I’m just wondering whether we want to take a break. We’ve been going an
hour and a half.

Hardy: Sure. The tape is just about out actually.

Singer: Do you want to get something to eat?

Hardy: Absolutely.

Singer: Let’s do that then. \[Tape interruption\].

Hardy: This is tape two, interview with Peter Singer, January 30th.
Where did we leave off? I guess publication of Animal Liberation, and
you are still in New York. We were talking about what the American
reception was.

Singer: You were talking about the American reception of the ideas when
I’d give the talks before. I think we probably covered that. So I left
America just before Christmas ’74, having handed the manuscript to Bob
Silvers.

The other thing that I should mention, at the end of that continuing
education course that I gave, Henry Spira stood up and said, “We’ve
talked a lot about animals and what’s being done to them. If you’d like
to meet in order to do something about it, I’d like to. If there are
other people in this group who would like to start something to try to
really make — to try and do something that would make a difference, then
here’s my address and we can meet at such and such a time.” So Henry
kind of kept in touch with me to some extent. He would call me when I
was in Australia and tell me about the plans for that group.

I mention that because I think it was that group that led to the first
successful campaign in the United States against experiments on animals.
I’m pretty sure it was the first. Anyway, certainly as far as I’m aware,
it was the first — the campaign at the \[American\] Museum of Natural
History, which I’ve written about in the book I did on Henry Spira,
Ethics Into Action.\[8\]

So I went back to Australia, took up this job at La Trobe University. I
didn’t really get — there wasn’t really an animal movement at that stage
in Australia to get involved in. There was the same as in England
basically. There was the RSPCA. There was one little anti-vivisection
group. There wasn’t anything that I felt very much like getting involved
in. Also I guess I was just fairly busy with a new position at La Trobe
University, with our first child who was then one and a half, and a
second child on the way. So it wasn’t really a good time for me to spend
a lot of time getting active or trying to start something up.

I suppose the next event of significance was the actual publication of
Animal Liberation, which came out, I think, about September probably,
’75 in the United States. The New York Review brought me back to do some
publicity for it. I did a little tour of New York, Boston, Washington,
Chicago, San Francisco, L.A. I think that’s all it was. I did some radio
and TV interviews about it. That went fairly well. Generally I thought
it got quite a good reception. There was a lot of novelty to the idea of
animal liberation, a lot of sort of curiosity, some kind of attempt to
ridicule or mock, I guess. It was a bit too far out. But a lot of people
didn’t take that line. They actually did see it as raising serious
questions, and there were quite a few who were really quite sympathetic.

Hardy: What hopes, fears, expectations did you have for publication of
the book?

Singer: I think I had high hopes and serious fears. The fear was that it
would have the same fate as Animals, Men, and Morals, basically not be
noticed. Of course, I was hopeful that having the cachet of the New York
Review would get it noticed by more people. And at the opposite end, I
hoped that everyone else would just find this argument as rationally
compelling as I did and agree with it and become vegetarians and that
would lead to the collapse of factory farming. I did hope for that. I
also knew that it was probably a little unrealistic.

So somewhere in the middle there was something that is probably a little
closer to what has actually happened. That is, that the book did trigger
a movement of kinds — not absolutely instantly, I have to say, but over
the next two or three years — and that people would be influenced
through it to become vegetarians and to campaign against factory farming
and so on. So some of that has happened, but a lot more slowly than I
would have hoped it to happen.

The book was published in England and Australia later than in America —
’76 it came out. I wasn’t in England when it was published, but I was,
of course, in Australia. I did some more publicity at that time. But
nothing very much happened for a little while really. Yes, I got letters
from people who were interested in it. I heard about little groups who
were starting things. A group that had existed in England or came into
existence around the time that Animal Liberation was first published,
then called the Band of Mercy run by two guys called Cliff Goodman and
Ronnie Lee, changed its name to call itself the Animal Liberation Front,
which I think I assume was inspired by the book.

I guess some things were happening in Britain. Richard Ryder also
published his book, Victims of Science,\[9\] around the same time that
Animal Liberation was published. He was trying to get the movement
organized more politically. He was also trying to get a group of more
radical people to take over the RSPCA, which was so conservative in
those days. They actually had fox hunters sitting on its Council. It
didn’t take a line against fox hunting or animal experiments or factory
farming really. There were various interesting things going on but much
more in England than in the United States and very little in Australia
at that time.

Things started changing in that respect I guess about ’77, ’78, ’79,
where groups started forming, explicitly taking up the sword of animal
liberation philosophy that I had put forward in the book. I had eighteen
months leave in ’78, ’79, mostly leave without pay but a bit of
sabbatical leave. I spent the second half of ’78 in England and nearly
all of ’79 in the United States. I had a fellowship at the Smithsonian
\[Institution\] in Washington with the Woodrow Wilson Center for
International Scholars. So that gave me a sense of where the movement
was starting to be in those places. In England I saw people like Richard
Ryder. In America I think People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals
was just starting. I’m pretty sure they invited me to some sort of
Thanksgiving event where they had a sort of ice cream turkey or
something like that, I think. I guess probably they weren’t vegan at
that stage but just vegetarian.

Hardy: They didn’t have Tofurkys yet?

Singer: I don’t think they had a Tofurky, as far as I can remember. I
think they had an ice cream one with plastic drumsticks, is my
recollection. I could have got that wrong. That could have been
somewhere else.

So it was clear then that interesting things were starting to happen. Of
course, I saw Henry Spira, and his movement had had this wonderful
campaign against the American Museum of Natural History and then
actually succeeded in stopping those experiments, and then was moving on
to other things like repeal of the Metcalfe-Hatch Act, which allowed
labs to seize pound animals. Maybe he was just starting then the
campaign — would he have been staring the cosmetics campaign, the
anti-Revlon one? Maybe. Most of that was in 1980 rather, after I again
was back in Australia.

I think my first involvement with an Australian group was when I came
back to Australia after that visit. A couple of people had started an
animal liberation group in Australia. They had written to me, but I
hadn’t actually been involved in the real founding of it — a woman
called Christine Townend in Sydney and Patty Mark in Melbourne. So when
I got back I joined that Victorian group, the Melbourne-based group. I
guess that’s what got me started in the organizational side of the
animal movement in Australia.

Hardy: In the years immediately following publication of Animal
Liberation — at least in retrospect this is one of the great manifestos
with Uncle Tom’s Cabin or Silent Spring. It’s a book that really does
sort of articulate and help set in motion a major social movement. I
guess at that point you become permanently identified with it. I guess
you have a special role or responsibility in the movement from that
moment forward.

Singer: Yes, I guess I did.

Hardy: You’re still — you’re twenty-nine years old maybe at this point,
your late twenties? Can you tell me about how its publication sort of
transforms the way people look at you or the role that you play?

Singer: It certainly did make a difference, and I wasn’t totally happy
about it, I have to say, because, as I said earlier in answer to your
question about why this issue rather than the Vietnam War and so on, I
wrote this book because I felt this was an important issue and because I
thought I could make a more significant contribution to this issue than
I could make to issues about war or global poverty or other questions.
But I had never thought that this was the only major issue around or
even the most important of all moral issues around. I had just chosen to
write the book because I thought it was the issue in which I could make
the most difference. So I wasn’t totally happy with being identified as
the animal liberation guy.

I remember when in ’77 I took up — I moved from La Trobe University
where my first Australian appointment had been to Monash University
because a chair became vacant. Australian universities don’t promote
people through to being full professors. There has to be a vacant chair
in the department that you have to apply for. So somewhat surprisingly,
I was appointed to this chair, because I was pretty young to have a
chair at that stage. I remember someone joking that, “What are they
going to call it? The chair of animal liberation studies?” or something
like that. I didn’t like that because I didn’t want to be known as the
animal liberation person.

My first book had been on civil disobedience. I already knew that there
were other things that I wanted to write about. I was planning, I guess,
the book that became Practical Ethics, which covered a range of
different issues. So I saw myself as someone working in applied ethics,
and I saw this was one important issue in applied ethics, but I never
wanted to become just a person who works on issues about animals. I
think philosophically people don’t see me just as that now. But a lot of
the wider public, I suppose, does, especially in the English-speaking
world. Did it change me? Well, I don’t know. I guess it did change the
way people looked at me.

I don’t want to go too much the other way. I’m proud of having written
Animal Liberation and having contributed in that way. I’m happy to be
identified with it but not in the sense that it’s the only thing that I
do.

Hardy: But it does place you in the center of what is an evolving
international movement. What role did you see yourself playing in that
movement after publication of the book when you see the organizations
starting to take shape in Britain and the United States?

Singer: I wanted to play a role in terms of doing what I could to help
it, which as far as Britain and the United States was concerned was
mostly a matter, I guess, of trying to talk to people and work out ideas
about what’s the best strategy to follow, through having a good range of
contacts with a lot of different people, and occasionally writing things
that would help to spread the idea. Whereas in Australia I could play a
more direct political role by getting involved organizationally, which I
did from the time I came back to Australia after that second trip at the
end of ’79. Then I started to get quite involved in specific campaigns
to bring about specific changes in the law or specific reforms. But that
always then had an Australian focus, although we did obviously keep in
touch with what was going on elsewhere and tried to keep ourselves
abreast of trends and learn from the things that were working and not to
do the things that weren’t working.

Hardy: I want to ask you about the campaigns you became involved with in
Australia and where your scholarship moved after publication. But the
one thing in preparing for this that interested me was that I know you
must have been excoriated by some and that there must have been some
very critical reviews. You’ve been at the middle of a firestorm of one
form or another for decades now. How did you deal with the first really
angry reviews or criticism that came? Do you remember it? Can you
recall?

Singer: I don’t actually remember what the first really hostile review
was now. Back in Australia I’ve got a big scrapbook where I kept them
all practically, but I don’t have it here.

Hardy: You did keep them?

Singer: Yes. Actually, my mother kept them, I have to say, when she was
alive. She used to cut things out.

Hardy: What was your parents’ response to having their son vilified?

Singer: You see, a lot of it wasn’t — the first review that I saw of the
book, as far as I can remember, was the one that the New York Times gave
it in their Sunday book supplement which was a full-page review and a
very positive one by someone I had never heard of or really didn’t know
at all. That was terrific. It was great to get a serious good positive
review in the New York Times. In fact, most of the stuff that came out
for the American edition was pretty positive. The Village Voice did a
really big thing on it; that was great. I can’t remember all the others,
but there were a number of pretty positive things. I can’t really
remember the first one actually vilifying or ridiculing the book.

But let’s go back a little. I can tell you — I’m pretty sure the first
piece that actually kind of mocked something that I had written about
animal liberation is linked with quite a funny story. It came out after
the New York Review article in ’73. It was published in this left-wing
thing called the Guardian, not the English Guardian but the American
Guardian, a much more Marxist journal. It was basically saying, “Look
what these trendy radical chic people of the New York Review have come
up with now in order to distract the working class from the serious
issues of exploitation of labor and oppression of the working people —
animal liberation.” So that was kind of annoying.

But the way I actually found out about this was through Henry Spira.
That was the way that he first heard of animal liberation, because he
was very much part of the left and read that. He realized in reading it
that, although this guy was having a lot of fun saying how silly it was,
maybe it wasn’t that silly after all. I guess that made me realize that
bad publicity can still be useful. It at least means that people hear of
the thing, and some of them will see through the bad publicity. So
perhaps that helped me to get less angry about hostile reviews or
hostile opinion, or perhaps it’s just that I have a fairly equable
temperament anyway and I don’t really get worked up about these things.

Hardy: It is a question — it’s a joke among teachers that when you get
your student evaluations back, if ninety percent are glowing adulation
and ten percent say you suck, then you’re going to focus on or
concentrate on the ten percent. “I’m a terrible teacher because I
didn’t” — and I would think that with — you’ve been such a large target
for so many people that I’m curious about how you develop those skills
to deal with that sort of criticism. You say part of it may just be your
temperament. Was there more to it?

Singer: I really don’t know. How do you ever isolate these things? Maybe
you just get used to it. I can remember being upset by a critical review
of Democracy and Disobedience\[10\] which I thought misunderstood the
book. I got upset enough by that to write a letter to the editor of the
Times Higher Education Supplement complaining about it. But generally —
I just can’t remember particularly a bad review that got me upset, which
is not to say there wasn’t one, maybe just that I’ve forgotten it. After
a while you do just get hardened to this. Inevitably you have to. I
don’t know. I think it is partly a matter of temperament, too.

It’s partly a matter of temperament that made it even possible for me to
write the book, because a number of people I know in the animal movement
have said, “Look, I just couldn’t read that chapter two, the one about
animal experiments.” Well, the stuff that I was reading the original
documents describing — the experimenter’s own journal articles or
whatever — describing what they did to animals was generally a lot worse
than what’s in the book. I had to read through ten times or a hundred
times as much stuff as actually appears in the book. I think it takes a
certain kind of temperament to be able to do that, just to sit down and
read that day after day and tell yourself, “This is pretty horrible
stuff you’re reading, but you’ve got to somehow get the news out to
people that this is what’s happening. So you’ve got to keep reading it
in order to present the case against it effectively.”

Hardy: When you completed Animal Liberation, what was your next project
going to be?

Singer: I didn’t automatically think that having finished one book I was
going to write another. My first book had grown out of my thesis, and
one of the examiners had suggested I should approach Oxford University
Press, that they might be interested in publishing it. The second book,
as I told you, arose out of this suggestion from an editor of Simon &
Schuster who later disappeared. So they were prompted by particular
things, not by the thought that I need to be writing a book.

When I finished Animal Liberation I didn’t particularly think I need to
be writing another book now. What I did think was that I’m starting a
new job and I need to prepare some courses and things of that sort.
Maybe I’ll write some articles and so on. So I didn’t have any — it was
really the course preparation that came along.

Then at some stage — I finished Animal Liberation Christmas of ’74.
Maybe in ’76, I think, I got a letter from Cambridge University Press,
an editor there, saying would I be interested in writing a textbook on
issues, problems, in applied ethics. As I had been teaching a course in
that area, I could see that I already had done a lot of the work in
terms of organizing materials and topics and so on. So I said yes to
that, and that’s what became my third book, Practical Ethics. Practical
Ethics was published in ’79, so there was a bit of a gap between Animal
Liberation and Practical Ethics.

Hardy: When did the anthology \[Animal Rights and Human Obligations\]
come out that you co-edited with Tom \[Regan\]?\[11\]

Singer: Oh, the one with Tom, yes. I’ve missed talking about that,
haven’t I? That came out in ’76, I think. That was Tom’s idea, I think.
I don’t know what he told you, but —

Hardy: I don’t remember.

Singer: If he said it was his idea, this time he was right.
\[Laughter\]. I think it was his suggestion — I can’t exactly remember —
that we should put together an anthology. I had met Tom when he came to
Oxford in the summer of ’73 because he contacted me. That was after the
“Animal Liberation” article had appeared in the New York Review. He was
interested in the area and I think was writing that sort of Gandhian
piece about animals that he published in the Canadian Journal of
Philosophy, I think, or somewhere like that.\[12\] So we talked a bit
about animals and issues then. Then perhaps he invited me to come down
to Raleigh, North Carolina, and give a talk. Maybe that was one of the
talks I gave when I was at NYU in ’73, ’74. That must be when he
suggested that we might work on this together, which we did. Where was
I?

Bad reviews and criticism we were talking about. The other thing I
wanted was to be reasonably effective. One occasion I remember where I
got a fair amount of ridicule was after Animal Liberation was published
in Australia. I went on a television program called “Monday Conference,”
which the format was you had the presenter and one person that he was
interviewing, discussing things with, up on a stage. Then you had this
live audience of maybe a hundred, hundred and fifty people who were
invited by the organizers of the program, although if you gave them some
suggestions they would invite a dozen or twenty people that the person
being interviewed wanted up there. But then they would invite others
whom they thought would make a good program.

So I got up and the presenter asked me a few questions about Animal
Liberation and what the idea of it was and so on. I put up the
arguments. \[He\] then throws it open to the floor for questions and
debate. It turned out that at least half of this audience were farmers
who had been brought in from somewhere or other. So we got fairly
hostile. I guess there were some scientists there, too, probably, so it
was a fairly hostile sort of audience. But I think you have to remain
calm and cool and rational and give the best answers. It’s no point
getting hostile or hysterical. It doesn’t persuade people of your point
of view at all.

Hardy: So you get back to Australia and you’re preparing courses. One of
the things I asked Tom about and want to ask you about as well is sort
of the relationship between the life of the mind and the life of action.
You both are philosophers who really have become active in political
causes. I guess when we were talking earlier you mentioned that in fact
you were involved in the student movement in Australia while you were an
undergraduate. Can we back up a bit and you tell me more about your
motivation for becoming involved politically or what led to that? Some
people do; some people don’t. What drew you into —

Singer: I don’t know. I guess I sort of saw things that seemed wrong and
wanted to do something about it. In the mid-60s that was not an unusual
response, certainly among students. So it wasn’t as if that made you
someone way out on a limb by wanting to do something about it. In that
sense I guess I’ve always had this sort of basically political idea that
you should get involved in the life of your community and in trying to
make it go in the direction you think is right.

Hardy: And the willingness and the confidence to take leadership roles.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Singer: Yes, to some extent. It all depends who else was around and who
else was willing to do it. I didn’t have to be leader, but at the time
this campaign against conscription was founded, it

was a relatively small group at first. There were no other sort of
obvious leader types in it, I guess. There were preexisting student
groups. There was a student Labour club and various other sorts of
groups basically occupying the political spectrums of the major
political parties. But there wasn’t this particular sort of
anti-conscription group which seemed to a few of us to be a good way of
arousing opposition to the war, because there was a lot of debate about
whether the war was or was not justified, but you could get people who
were not confident that this war was wrong but were saying people ought
to have the choice whether to go and fight in it or not. It wasn’t a war
for Australia’s national security. It wasn’t a war for Australia’s
defense. Essentially our forces were just a token number of troops
alongside the American forces. There was no real reason why you couldn’t
have got enough volunteers to go and do that.

Hardy: This is sort of a question to sort of lead into discussion or
questions about your activities in Australia once you got back after
’79. Would you characterize yourself as volunteering or being recruited
for —

Singer: I was asked whether I would be willing to join. Patty Mark wrote
me a letter while I was in America, I think, if I remember rightly,
saying that she was staring this group following Chris Townend’s example
in Sydney and was I interested in being part of it. I said, “Yes, sure.
If you are doing something which basically is following the philosophy
of my book, I would certainly want to be part of it.” \[Telephone
interruption\]. I’m trying to remember where we were when that rang.

Hardy: Back to Australia and you’re preparing courses.

Singer: You were asking me about getting involved. So Patty Mark wrote
to me, and I said, “Sure. When I get back, I’ll come along.” She then
told me when they were having a meeting, and I went along. There were
six people meeting at the back of a church hall or something or other, a
very small group. But we were pretty enthusiastic about making a start,
and so we got started. We got some very good press publicity pretty
early on. I started to focus on factory farm issues, and the group grew
and it was quite successful, I think, in stirring up issues about the
treatment of animals, not that we’ve dramatically changed factory
farming in Australia unfortunately as yet, but we’ve certainly made a
lot more people think about it. We’ve helped to rally more people to
vegetarian or vegan ways of life. We’ve had campaigns against furs and
campaigns against steel-jawed leg-hold traps and a whole range of
different things, I guess. It’s had, I would say, sort of minor
successes and a lot of consciousness-raising rather than any really
major breakthroughs.

Hardy: How would you compare the animal liberation movement in Australia
to its counterpart in Britain or the United States?

Singer: I think Britain is clearly the leader still on these issues. In
fact, the whole of the European Union is now well ahead of the United
States or Australia. The British movement is larger, more active, and is
being more successful in changing public opinion and in getting things
done politically — that is, influencing governments. The Australian
movement has probably been more successful than the American movement in
improving conditions for animals in experimentation.

\[End of Interview\].

***Interview two of two begins at page 47***

INDEX

abortion 7

academic and education profession 13–14, 15, 16, 19, 25

American Museum of Natural History (New York) 20

Analysis \[magazine\] 14

animal experimentation and testing 11, 20, 25

Animal Liberation \[article\] 14, 16, 26

Animal Liberation \[book\] 4, 12, 17, 19–23, 25, 26

Animal Liberation Front (ALF) 21

Animal Machines 6

Animal Rights and Human Obligations \[book\] 25

animal rights movement/animal protection community 5, 6, 8, 20, 21–22,
23, 27–28

Animals, Men, and Morals 10, 12, 13, 21

antiwar movement 7–8, 27

Australia 1, 3, 4, 7, 15, 17, 19–23, 26, 27

Melbourne 2, 4, 16, 22

Sydney 22, 27

Victoria 3, 7

Austria

Vienna 1

Benn, Stanley 6

Brown University 19

Cambridge University Press 25

campaigning/lobbying 20

Canadian Journal of Philosophy 26

chickens 10–12

civil disobedience 8

Compassion in World Farming 10

Connecticut 17

Democracy and Disobedience \[book\] 8, 24

demonstrations and protests 8

education 1–4

England See Great Britain

Epstein, Jason 16

ethics and morality 3, 6–7, 8, 14, 19, 22–23

Ethics Into Action \[book\] 20

European Union 27

factory farming 6, 10–12, 17

France 7

Friends of Animals 17

Glover, Jonathan 5

Godlovitch, Roslind 6, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14

Godlovitch, Stanley 6, 9, 10, 12

Goodman, Cliff 21

Great Britain 1, 4, 7, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 27

London 5, 8

Oxford 9–13, 15

Guardian \[US magazine\] 24

Hare, R. M. 9

Harris, John 10, 12

Harrison, Ruth 6, 12, 17

Illich, Ivan 16

Johns Hopkins University 15

Kant, Immanuel 6

Kennedy, John F. 16

Keshen, Mary 6, 9, 10

Keshen, Richard 5–7, 9, 10

La Trobe University 20, 22

laboratory animals 6

Lee, Ronnie 21

Mackie, John 13

Mark, Patty 22, 27

Maryland

Baltimore 15

Mason, Jim 17

media 26

Melbourne University Campaign Against Conscription 7

Monash University 22

Monday Conference \[television program\] 26

Moral Problems \[book\] 14

Museum of Natural History (New York) 22

New Food for All Palates 9

New Statesman 13

New York 17

New York City 15–17, 20

New York Public Library 17

New York Review of Books 13, 14, 16, 18, 20, 21, 24, 26

New York Times 24

New York University (NYU) 15, 16, 18, 19, 26

Oswald, Lee Harvey 16

Oxford University 2–5, 7, 9–13, 15, 26

Oxford University Press 25

Parfit, Derek 15

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 21

Peters, Michael 10

Philosophical Exchange \[magazine\] 19

Philosophy \[magazine\] 15

Philosophy and Public Affairs \[magazine\] 14

politics 23

Practical Ethics \[book\] 19, 23, 25

psychological aspects 22–25, 26–27

public relations/outreach 10–12, 20–21, 26

Rachels, James 14

Radical Philosophy Group 8

Random House 16

Regan, Tom 25, 26

Rethinking Life and Death \[book\] 19

Revlon 22

Roberts, Peter 10, 11

rodents 6

Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) 5, 21

Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA)
\[Australia\] 20

Ryder, Richard 11, 12, 21

Second Oswald \[book\] 16

Silent Spring \[book\] 22

Silvers, Robert 13, 14, 16, 18, 20

Simon & Schuster 14–17, 25

Singer, Renata \[wife\] 4, 6, 9, 13, 17

Smithsonian Institution 21

Spira, Henry 19, 20, 22, 24

State University of New York at Brockport 19

Townend, Christine 22, 27

United Action for Animals (UAA) 17

University of Melbourne 2

veal calves 10–11

vegetarianism 5–6, 9–10, 18

Victims of Science \[book\] 21

Vietnam War 7, 8, 13, 22

Village Voice 24

Washington, DC 21

Wasserstrom, Richard 6

Wood, David 10

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[1\] Peter Singer, Animal Liberation: A New Ethic for Our Treatment of
Animals, 2d ed. (New York: New York Review of Books, 1990; originally
published in 1975). Also 1st Ecco paperback ed., 2002.

\[2\] Ruth Harrison, Animal Machines: The New Factory Farming Industry
(London: Vincent Stuart, 1964).

\[3\] Sally Berg and Lucien Berg, New Food for All Palates: A Vegetarian
Cook Book (London: V. Gollancz, 1967).

\[4\] Stanley Godlovitch, Roslind Godlovitch, John Harris, eds.,
Animals, Men, and Morals: An Inquiry into the Maltreatment of Non-humans
(London: V. Gollancz, 1971; New York: Taplinger, 1972).

\[5\] The book contains the following thirteen essays: Ruth Harrison,
“On Factory Farming”; Lady Dowding, “Furs and Cosmetics: Too High a
Price?”; Richard Ryder, “Experiments on Animals”; Terrence Hegarty,
“Alternatives”; John Harris, “Killing for Food”; Maureen Duffy, “Beasts
for Pleasure”; Brigid Brophy, “In Pursuit of a Fantasy”; Leonard Nelson,
“Duties to Animals”; Roslind Godlovitch, “Animals and Morals”; Stanley
Godlovitch, “Utilities”; David Wood, “Strategies”; Michael Peters,
“Nature and Culture”; Patrick Corbett, “Postscript.”

\[6\] James Rachels, ed., Moral Problems: A Collection of Philosophical
Essays (New York: Harper & Row, \[1971\]).

\[7\] Peter Singer, Practical Ethics, 2d ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1993; originally published in 1979); Peter Singer,
Rethinking Life and Death: The Collapse of Our Traditional Ethics (New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995). See Unsanctifying Human Life: Essays on
Ethics (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2002).

\[8\] Peter Singer, Ethics Into Action (Lanham, Md.: Rowman &
Littlefield, 1998).

\[9\] Richard D. Ryder, Victims of Science: The Use of Animals in
Research (London: Davis-Poynter, 1975).

\[10\] Peter Singer, Democracy and Disobedience (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1973).

\[11\] Tom Regan and Peter Singer (eds.), Animal Rights and Human
Obligations (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1976).

\[12\] Tom Regan, “The Moral Basis of Vegetarianism.” Canadian Journal
of Philosophy 5 (1975), 181-214.

Peter Singer

May 14, 2004

Princeton, New Jersey

Charles Hardy III, Interviewer

Interview two of two

\[Begin Disc 1\]

Hardy: What I did in preparation for today was read over Ethics Into
Action XE "Ethics Into Action \[book\]" , and I think that might be a
nice springboard to sort of pick up where we left off last time. And I
think where we did leave off last time was somewhere — we talked a bit
about your activities after you moved to Australia XE "Australia" in
1980. But it struck me in reading Ethics Into Action XE "Ethics Into
Action \[book\]" that one thing we didn’t talk about at all was your
relationship with Henry XE "Spira, Henry" Spira. That’s a way to get
back and to cover some of the parts of the 70s I was interested in that
we didn’t speak about last time.

What I don’t want you to do is sort of retell stories or developments
that you’ve already written about at length or you’ve already been
interviewed about at length. That’s going to be boring for you, and it
can be found elsewhere. So if I ask you one of those questions, just
say, “Look here. You can find that there.” But I want to try and add a
sort of biographical dimension that isn’t in existing interviews or
works.

Singer: Okay. Obviously I have written about Henry XE "Spira, Henry" in
that book, but you’re looking for something a little different.

Hardy: Yes. But I noticed in the book, your own activities are really in
the background, and you don’t talk much about your relationship with
him. You say he arrived as a student in your class at NYU XE "New York
University (NYU)" and then you had what became a very close relationship
for many years. When Henry XE "Spira, Henry" first began his campaign
with the Natural Museum of American History —

Singer: American Museum of Natural History XE "Museum of Natural History
(New York)" .

Hardy: American Museum — what did I say?

Singer: Natural Museum of American History.

Hardy: American Museum of Natural History XE "Museum of Natural History
(New York)" . What was your relationship there? What relationship, if
any, did you have?

Singer: At that stage we just were having a telephone relationship XE
"campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp1" , because I was back in Australia XE
"Australia" . I had gone back at the end of ’74. I think — I can’t
remember the next time I was in the US. It was probably in ’78 or early
’79. So the years when he was planning that and then carrying out that
campaign, we were far apart. He called me and we spoke about it quite a
bit XE "Spira, Henry" . In fact, I remember that Renata XE "Singer,
Renata \[wife\]" , my wife, was sort of amazed at how long he would
speak from New York, because that wasn’t like now when you could speak
for seven cents a minute or something. These were quite expensive calls.
Nobody — not even when, say, we were in Oxford XE "Great Britain:Oxford"
and we were speaking to my parents, we never chatted for an hour or so.
Henry XE "Spira, Henry" would do that. He would call me up and talk
about what he’d found out. We’d talk about strategies and tactics and
stuff and keep me informed with what was actually happening. But it was
all by phone.

Hardy: So what counsel did you provide?

Singer: I think XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper1" ,
you know, Henry XE "Spira, Henry" and I were probably fairly much in
agreement on the major tactics — that is, find the right target was the
crucial thing. By that I meant a target which there was obvious cruelty
to animals, animals were clearly suffering. It wasn’t to cure cancer or
something of that sort. It was something that most people would see as,
“Well, why are they bothering to do that?” Ideally, it’s not going to be
on rats and mice because people don’t have so much sympathy with them,
so find an animal that people have sympathy with.

Of course, Henry XE "Spira, Henry" found exactly that at the American
Museum of Natural History XE "Museum of Natural History (New York)" . It
was the perfect set of experiments. They were clearly causing suffering
to cats XE "cats" who were being mutilated, who were being deprived of
their senses XE "laboratory animals" . It was to find out how this
affected their sexual behavior. It was nothing that was really going to
have any great beneficial spin-offs for humans or anyone else. And it
was on cats, so it was a perfect set of experiments.

Then when he had that, the major issues were how to get attention for
the campaign, what sort of demands to make. So I was always pretty
pragmatic. Although my views as to what I would like to see, my ultimate
vision \[is\] far-reaching, I’ve always been pragmatic about the steps
you take to get there. So I’m always prepared to work for interim steps
that will reduce the amount of suffering that animals experience. Henry
XE "Spira, Henry" and I were very much on the same wavelength about
that.

Hardy: Was he using you more as a springboard just to bounce ideas off
of —

Singer: Exactly.

Hardy: — or were you really collaborating?

Singer: No, I think I was a sounding board. It was Henry XE "Spira,
Henry" ’s initiative and ideas, and he was the one who in the end always
called the shots. I wasn’t the only one that he was talking to either.
He had this method of working where he would talk to other people. This
was early on so I can’t remember exactly who else he had to talk to, but
I know he had some people who had come from the class that he took with
me, and that was the initial, the first group. He used some of those
people and probably other people as well.

Hardy: Mid- to late 70s XE "animal rights movement/animal protection
community" \\r "ar1" , how significant did you consider the events
taking place in the United States compared to what was going on in Great
Britain XE "Great Britain" or Australia XE "Australia" ?

Singer: I think that I regarded Britain XE "Great Britain" still as the
forefront of the movement. It was a much larger movement in Britain.
There were more radical people. There were certainly far more
vegetarians XE "vegetarianism" and vegans in Britain XE "Great Britain"
. It wasn’t really happening here. The American movement was only just
forming really. You could hardly speak of it as a movement. But it did
develop rapidly in those years, so from ’76, sort of mid- to late 70s —
did you say 70s or did you say 80s now?

Hardy: 70s.

Singer: 70s, yes. So from ’76 to ’79 or whatever, there was a big
change. Things were starting to happen, and the American movement was
starting to get significant by the end of that period.

Hardy: Then was it in ’78 there was the first international conference
on animals — you mentioned that in Ethics Into Action XE "Ethics Into
Action \[book\]" — in Britain XE "Great Britain" ?

Singer: Richard Ryder XE "Ryder, Richard" organized a conference that
was the first sort of international animal rights conference
specifically. Of course, there had been animal welfare conferences of
various sorts. But he organized a conference at Cambridge XE "Great
Britain:Cambridge" which, unfortunately, I couldn’t go to because I was
in Australia XE "Australia" at the time. It wasn’t that easy to travel.
Travel was relatively more expensive at that time. I didn’t have the
fare to do it, so I wasn’t there. But I could find the date of that,
because there was a volume of proceedings published that I must have
somewhere. It may be ’78. I can’t —

Hardy: I was unclear from what you had written whether you had attended
or not, and I guess —

Singer: No, I didn’t attend. They published the proceedings, and they
asked me to write a preface, if I remember correctly. Actually, it’s up
there, if you want to get it. You can have a look. It’s the blue book on
the end, the right end of the top shelf.

Hardy: Animal Rights: A Symposium XE "Animal Rights\\: A Symposium" .

Singer: Yes, that’s the one.

Hardy: And there was a declaration.

Singer: Yes. I think you’ll find it in the front of that book. I think
you’ll find that I’ve written a preface to it. That should give you the
date.

Hardy: So what were your thoughts about the conference and the
declaration? How significant was it?

Singer: I wasn’t convinced at the time that it was really significant. I
mean, it was a small group of people meeting with the right kind of
ideas, and I agree with the declaration, but what’s this little group of
people against huge industries XE "business corporations" that turn over
billions of dollars or pounds or whatever we’re talking about? I wasn’t
convinced that this was the start of something that could really make a
lot of difference at that stage.

Hardy: It’s the summer of ’77.

Singer: Right. In fact, because I went to England XE "England" \\t "See
Great Britain" XE "Great Britain" in ’78. I did have some leave then, so
it would have been the second half of ’78 anyway, I would have been
there.

Hardy: The second conference in ’79 in Blacksburg XE
"Virginia:Blacksburg" , Virginia, at Virginia Polytechnic XE "Virginia
Polytechnic Institute" — did you attend that?

Singer: I did attend that because, as I said, I had this period of
leave, ’78, ’79, and I was in the United States for the first half of —
well, all of ’79, as it turned out. I think that conference was in the
first half. I’m not sure if I remember rightly, anyway. But yes, I did
go down to Blacksburg XE "Virginia:Blacksburg" , enjoyed it very much.
Henry XE "Spira, Henry" Spira came there as well. I’ve still got a
photo. It’s getting rather nostalgic, because apart from myself, there’s
Henry XE "Spira, Henry" ; the philosopher Jim Rachels XE "Rachels,
James" , who sadly died last year; Stephen XE "Clark, Stephen" Clark,
who was one of, of course, one of the early authors, philosophers
involved in this — he wrote a book called The Moral Status of Animals XE
"Moral Status of Animals" — Dale Jamieson XE "Jamieson, Dale" , who I
still see and, in fact, had lunch with two hours ago; and Ray Frey XE
"Frey, Ray" , who I don’t see that much and who is, to some extent, on
the other side, I guess. He’s written different things.

So that was a good meeting. I enjoyed it very much. I think it probably
did help to bring people together. It brought some people involved in
the movement as activists together with philosophers and so on. It still
wasn’t a huge event though or anything like that.

Hardy: What was the purpose, the result? What can you tell me about the
conference?

Singer: I mean, it was like academic conferences are. There were people
presenting papers and people responding. There was also, again, a book
published from that, too, called Ethics and Animals XE "Ethics and
Animals \[book\]" that I probably have somewhere but I can’t see at the
moment. It was not all pro-animal people, so it was very different. It
was different from the one at Cambridge XE "Great Britain:Cambridge" ,
and it was different from, say, the current animal rights summits that
they have, because it had some people defending farming methods. I think
there was this guy, Stanley Curtis XE "Curtis, Stanley" , a pig expert
who was saying that it doesn’t really harm pigs XE "pigs" to keep them
confined and matters of that sort. It was a discussion forum. It was not
really a great trigger for political activism. I don’t think in the long
run it would have made a huge difference in the movement whether it had
happened or not.

Hardy: But this is a period in which there’s increased interest and a
number of people beginning to think about animals from different
philosophical and, I would assume, economic perspectives.

Singer: Yes, absolutely. Yes, certainly, people were thinking about
animals from different perspectives. But if you want to say, “What’s
really making a difference in the long run,” it’s much more things like
Henry XE "Spira, Henry" ’s demonstration protests at the Museum of
Natural History XE "Museum of Natural History (New York)" and the fact
that that attracted large crowds, got articles in the New York Times XE
"New York Times" , got a sympathetic article, I think, in Science XE
"Science \[magazine\]" , by Nicholas Wade XE "Wade, Nicholas" . The
details would be in Ethics Into Action XE "Ethics Into Action \[book\]"
. But that really helped to put the movement on the map, that and other
things that other activists then started doing over the next few years.
I think that’s much more the driving force of change than conferences
like the one in Blacksburg XE "Virginia:Blacksburg" .

Hardy: So when did you first hear about PETA XE "People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PETA)" \[People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals\]?

Singer: I think it was around that time, but I don’t — I’m reluctant to
trust my memory on this. No doubt you can check. I spent part of 1979 in
Washington XE "Washington, DC" , DC, I think about eight months, the
last eight months of the year, I’d say, from April or something like
that, because I had a fellowship at the Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars XE "Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars" , which is in the Smithsonian Institution XE "Smithsonian
Institution" building, or was then anyway.

My recollection is that there was a vegetarian XE "vegetarianism"
Thanksgiving event that I went to with a kind of mock turkey. I can’t
remember whether it was tofu or what it was made of. But I think I got
invited to that, some people who knew I was in the area, and I think
that I might have met Ingrid XE "Newkirk, Ingrid" \[Newkirk\] and Alex
XE "Pacheco, Alex" \[Pacheco\] there and they said that they were
setting up this thing called People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals
XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" . I thought,
“That’s a cute name. I like that.” I particularly liked the sort of
“ethics” in the title, obviously. As far as I remember, that’s the first
I heard of it.

Hardy: What was the reaction — I guess it was — was it Henry XE "Spira,
Henry" who went undercover at the lab at Penn \[University of
Pennsylvania XE "University of Pennsylvania" \]?

Singer: No, no.

Hardy: I’m confusing —

Singer: You’re confusing a few different things. No, it wasn’t. Henry XE
"Spira, Henry" never worked for PETA XE "People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PETA)" , for a start.

Hardy: No, no. Alex XE "Pacheco, Alex" , I mean.

Singer: It was Alex XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper2"
. Alex XE "Pacheco, Alex" went undercover at the Silver Spring
laboratory XE "laboratory animals" \\r "exper2" , the Silver Spring
monkeys XE "Silver Spring monkeys" . A guy called Taub, Edward Taub XE
"Taub, Edward" , who was doing those experiments.

Hardy: And that was Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[book\]"
Front XE "Animal Liberation Front (ALF)" that did the break-in on —

Singer: On \[Thomas\] Gennarelli XE "Gennarelli, Thomas" ?

Hardy: On Gennarelli XE "Gennarelli, Thomas" . I shouldn’t — I was just
looking at this and my mind is blanking on it.

Singer: I don’t really remember who did the break-in actually, but, I
mean, it was Ingrid XE "Newkirk, Ingrid" and Alex XE "Pacheco, Alex" who
ran the campaign, I think. I think it was a PETA XE "People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" campaign. I don’t know who — I
mean, it was based on videotapes that they got, of course. I don’t know
who broke in and took the tapes. Maybe it’s never been made public. I’m
not sure. But what was done with those tapes — that is, editing them
down into this short little thing called “Unnecessary Fuss XE
"Unnecessary Fuss \[film\]" ,” because I think Gennarelli XE
"Gennarelli, Thomas" or someone — no, it wasn’t Gennarelli. Probably it
was the Secretary for Health and Human Services XE "U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services" who said, “Oh, they’re making a lot of
unnecessary fuss about nothing,” a little bit like our friend, Senator
\[James M.\] Inhofe XE "Inhofe, James M." just yesterday, incidentally,
about the abuses in the prison. He said, “The real outrage is the people
who are making so much outrage about it.”

So they did that, and they ran a campaign. Then they had a sit-in at NIH
\[National Institutes of Health XE "National Institutes of Health (NIH)"
\] headquarters, I think, in Bethesda XE "Maryland:Bethesda" . That, by
that time — I think we’ve skipped a few years now. If I remember
rightly, this must be something like ’84, I think, the Gennarelli XE
"Gennarelli, Thomas" stuff. But by that time, this was a major movement
and it was making waves and making a difference.

Hardy: What relationship did you have to these folks?

Singer: To Ingrid XE "Newkirk, Ingrid" and Alex XE "Pacheco, Alex" ? Not
very much. They were not — I was not personally close to them like I was
with Henry XE "Spira, Henry" . They knew what they wanted to do and no
doubt talked to each other and talked to other people locally and didn’t
feel that they had a lot of need to talk to me. I mean, I was perfectly
friendly. I went down at one stage to talk to the people working for
PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" at their
headquarters and so on. But they did their own thing, and they did it
well.

Hardy: What were your thoughts about their tactics XE
"campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp2" ?

Singer: A little torn XE "violence towards animals and humans" \\r
"camp2" . There are some things that PETA XE "People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PETA)" have done that have probably gone a bit
over the top that I wouldn’t have done. But on the whole, I think
they’ve been highly effective in making more people aware of the way in
which we abuse animals. I’m certainly prepared to say that, on the
whole, they’ve been a positive force in the movement.

Hardy: One of the things I was interested about was was it in ’85 that
you and Henry XE "Spira, Henry" issued a statement about the importance
of non-violence and condemnation of the increasingly violent tactics
that were taking place?

Singer: Yes, with a few other signatories as well, I think. Yes, that’s
right. Then I also had put something in the preface of In Defense of
Animals XE "In Defense of Animals \[book\]" which came out in ’86, and
again in the preface of the new edition of Animal Liberation XE "Animal
Liberation \[book\]" when that came out.

Hardy: What was the context for that? What’s the story behind it?

Singer: I can’t remember now exactly which instances of violence had
occurred at that time XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r
"exper3" , but there had been some XE "animal rights movement/animal
protection community" \\r "exper3" . I don’t think anybody had got hurt
at that stage XE "ethics and morality" \\r "exper3" , but there clearly
was a risk of that. People had, I don’t know, burned down a laboratory
building that was not yet completed, so there were no animals in it and
no people in it, but it caused extensive damage. There had been various
other actions. Certainly there had been some pretty extreme statements,
I think, by people in the movement, saying that it would be justified to
kill a vivisector, or something like that. Nobody had actually done it,
and fortunately still nobody has done it.

But we felt that this was having a harmful effect on the movement; that
we wanted the movement to be broad; we wanted it to take the high moral
ground; we wanted people to be able to see that we had an overwhelming
moral case against what was happening to animals. We could already see
that these instances of violence, although relatively minor, were being
used by our opponents to try and smear the entire movement. So we
thought it was necessary to make that stand, both in order to prevent
something really bad happening for its own sake, but also for strategic
reasons, in terms of the long-term good of the movement.

Hardy: What was your role in the movement at that point?

Singer: My role in the international movement was fairly modest XE
"public relations/outreach" \\r "pub1" , I would say. I mean, I would —
if I was traveling, I would speak, but I didn’t — I was living in
Australia XE "Australia" . I didn’t travel overseas very often. I had
young children at that stage. I guess I was somewhat more in the
background. Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[book\]" was
certainly around and having a big role. That was the period when Animal
Liberation had its greatest sales probably, because PETA XE "People for
the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" would give it away as a bonus
to anyone who joined, I think, or anyone who made a certain donation. So
PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" was
ordering copies by the ten-thousands from the publisher, getting a huge
discount, of course, so they’re able to give it away very cheaply. But
they went through hundreds of thousands of copies of the paperback,
giving it away at that stage.

I still get people coming to me. It happened the last time I spoke just
a month or so ago. People come up with this tattered little copy of the
paperback of Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[book\]" , which
was specially printed for PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals (PETA)" . It has “Presented with the compliments of PETA” or
something like that printed across the front cover, and saying, “I’ve
had this book since 1982 or something, and it made me a vegetarian XE
"vegetarianism" or whatever, and I’ve been working for animals ever
since. Would you sign it?” It certainly got the book out there.

The other thing that happened, which was kind of nice, was that people
would break into labs or other places where animals were abused and
would take the animals or damage the equipment that was being used to
abuse them and then would leave a copy of Animal Liberation XE "Animal
Liberation \[book\]" behind.

Hardy: Oh, really?

Singer: Yes. I thought it was functioning as a symbol for the movement’s
thoughts.

Hardy: But you’re in Australia XE "Australia" all this time.

Singer: Yes. As I say, I was in Washington XE "Washington, DC" , DC, in
’79 for eight months. I was in Boulder XE "Colorado:Boulder" , Colorado,
in ’84 for six months. I was again back in California XE "California"
for three or four months in ’87. But apart from that, I was in Australia
XE "Australia" , yes.

Hardy: How did you feel about what was taking place in the United States
and Britain XE "Great Britain" with you in Australia XE "Australia" , or
the celebrity that you were gaining from a work that you had published
eight, ten, twelve years before?

Singer: I was pleased to see that people were finding the ideas valuable
and that they were actually acting on them. I was working in the
movement XE "psychological aspects" , it’s just that I was working in
the movement in Australia XE "Australia" , of course. I was very much
involved at that time. I was president of Animal Liberation XE "Animal
Liberation \[Australian group\]" , an organization that was mostly
campaigning about factory farming XE "factory farms" . I was also chair
of something called the Australian Federation of Animal Societies XE
"Australian Federation of Animal Societies" , which was an umbrella
group that drew together a whole lot of different animal societies so
that they could have more impact on the federal level. So I was very
active, but in terms of keeping in touch with the international
movement, it was mostly at some distance.

I guess at some time during the 80s I started traveling more XE "animal
rights movement/animal protection community" \\r "ar2" , and I would
speak at events XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "ar2" . I remember I spoke
at an event that Henry XE "Spira, Henry" Spira organized about the
Draize test and the LD-50 test. It was probably around ’84, I would
guess, but I’m not really sure. And I was still talking, of course, with
Henry XE "Spira, Henry" on the phone. As he successfully completed one
campaign and moved onto the next, we would always discuss what to
campaign about next, what was a good issue, how to do it. I was keeping
in touch to some extent but not in the same way as if I had been over
here.

Hardy: At this point it’s becoming an international movement, in the
early 80s. What did it look like from the Australian perspective? It had
to have been highly decentralized, but was there sort of a — was there
any international coordination or was it really —

Singer: There was no general international cooperation XE "animal
experimentation and testing" \\r "exper4" . There might be on specific
issues XE "business corporations" \\r "exper4" . For example, Henry XE
"Spira, Henry" had in the very beginning of the 80s this campaign
against testing of cosmetics on animals. He had his famous Revlon XE
"Revlon" ad. After he had successfully persuaded Revlon to contribute to
research to develop alternatives to animal testing, he then started
trying to get all of the cosmetic giants to do so. So he went to Avon XE
"Avon" and then to Bristol-Myers XE "Bristol-Myers" . Avon and Revlon
were American corporations, but Bristol-Myers was international. It may
have even had its base in Britain XE "Great Britain" . I can’t really
remember. But I do remember that he coordinated with British
organizations to protest against Bristol-Myers’ experiments on animals
in Britain XE "Great Britain" . So on that particular issue, he had this
international coalition.

Then when he sort of basically won the cosmetic testing issue, he moved
on to the Draize test in general and the LD-50,a and also those were
international coalitions that he had. So Henry XE "Spira, Henry" would
organize those things internationally, but that was unusual. A lot of
other things were just organized more at a national rather than an
international level.

Hardy: How did he organize internationally?

Singer: I think he did it by personal contacts with people in different
groups. He would just call up these people and talk to them and say,
“We’re doing this. How about you get involved?” There were plenty of
groups that were very happy once he — that’s the great thing about
success. Once he actually succeeded in getting experiments at the Museum
of Natural History XE "Museum of Natural History (New York)" stopped,
people wanted to join with him because here was this amazing thing in
the movement, someone who had not simply endlessly sent out leaflets
that had no effect but someone who had actually worked out how to
achieve a victory that would stop experiments.

Hardy: So at this time Henry XE "Spira, Henry" really is at the center
of what’s taking place.

Singer: Well, I thought so. Now, my perspective might not have been
everyone’s perspective, because I was close to him. But I thought he was
at the center, at the leading edge, if you like. But certainly PETA XE
"People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" were doing
important work as well, but you had asked specifically about
international things. I think at that stage, if I remember rightly, PETA
XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" were not
operating internationally. Later they certainly went that way.

I guess there were other campaigns that were also international apart
from Henry XE "Spira, Henry" ’s. I think of Brian Davies XE "Davies,
Brian" and the campaign against the seal XE "seals" killing in Canada XE
"Canada" . That was certainly international. Of course, that was a
wildlife XE "wildlife (in general)" campaign as well as an animal rights
campaign. There was more international cooperation in anything that had
conservation, environmental XE "environmental issues/environmental
movement" aspects to it. But in terms of animal rights, I think there
wasn’t so much international linkage in the early 80s.

Hardy: As all these developments are taking place, how were your own
ideas evolving?

Singer: My ideas on the philosophical questions, the ethics XE "ethics
and morality" of how we ought to treat animals, have not really changed
very much since 1975 when I wrote Animal Liberation XE "Animal
Liberation \[book\]" . I wouldn’t say they have not changed at all.
There are some changes. There are some differences between the first and
the second edition. But the fundamental principle — the idea of equal
consideration of interests, obviously the rejection of speciesism —
those things were constant. The things that I’ve thought about in terms
of animals at the philosophical level were perhaps issues relating to
taking life, questions about killing as such, as distinct from questions
about inflicting pain and suffering.

Also XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp3" , of course, I thought a bit
about strategic and tactical issues. That’s what I talked with Henry XE
"Spira, Henry" about. But that wasn’t really me as a professional
philosopher; that was me, someone who had observed the movement from the
beginning and seen it in three different countries and perhaps thought
that I could contribute something on how best to achieve our goals.

Hardy: What did you think you could contribute then?

Singer: I felt that XE "business corporations" — and I can’t even say
now how much of this XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r
"exper5" came from me and how much of it came from Henry XE "Spira,
Henry" , because we talked a lot and we were so much in harmony. But the
kind of things that he talked about — incremental steps, showing that
you are reasonable at every stage, in other words, not being too
fanatical in your appearance, not saying, “Look, I’m just holding out
for everything.” For example, if he was going to go to a corporation
like Revlon XE "Revlon" , he was not going to say, “Until the day you
stop having any of your products tested on animals, we’re going to keep
attacking you.” He would work out what would be a reasonable thing for
them to do, and he realized that they couldn’t stop testing on animals
if they wanted to be able to market new products and compete in the
market. So he said, “Well, you know, look, if you give a certain
percentage of your profits, a very small percentage of your profits, to
research to develop alternatives, we’ll lay off you.” So it was
achievable goals, setting targets where you could actually win that was
important XE "business corporations" .

The other issue XE "factory farms" \\r "ff1" , I guess, that I didn’t
talk about where eventually Henry XE "Spira, Henry" agreed with me but
didn’t for some time, I think, was that there was actually a lot more
suffering going on in factory farming than there is in use of animals in
research, basically because the numbers are so much larger, but also
it’s even less controlled, less regulated XE "public relations/outreach"
\\r "pub2" . So I’ve been saying not only to Henry XE "Spira, Henry" but
to people in the American movement for a long time that the focus on
animals used in experimentation in the United States was a misguided
one. It had achieved a lot of good, because there were things like the
cat XE "cats" experiments at the Museum of Natural History XE "Museum of
Natural History (New York)" that offered a wonderful means to alert
people to what we do to animals, and people would come in on that
because they didn’t feel threatened. Nobody eats cats here, so they
didn’t feel they had to change their diet or anything just because they
were opposed to these experiments on cats. But there certainly came a
point where it was time to really look at where the largest amount of
the suffering is, and that’s the use of animals for food.

Hardy: This sounds more like a philosopher’s perspective than an
activist’s perspective.

Singer: Well, Henry XE "Spira, Henry" was an activist more than a
philosopher, and eventually he did agree with me that we needed to do
something about this. Again, it was partly the fact that I was more or
less taking an international view, because I was in Australia XE
"Australia" , so I could see that in Britain XE "Great Britain" and in
Europe in general, there was more focus on farm animal issues and that
they were starting to get somewhere at some point with that, whereas in
American they hadn’t.

The other thing is the debate is in a way easier with factory farming XE
"factory farms" . I mean, the animal movement here got into the state
where there were lobby groups that were putting these ads in the paper
saying, “Your child or your dog,” basically, and a picture of some cute
girl saying that she had had leukemia and but for animal experiments she
would have been dead. “Do you really want to think that it’s better to
let her die than to experiment on a rat?” or something. You can’t win
with the public on that sort of argument.

But XE "farm animals" \\r "farm1" what’s the argument in defense of
putting hens XE "chickens" in cages so small they can’t stretch their
wings, or putting calves XE "veal calves" in stalls where they can’t
turn around? Everybody knows you don’t need to eat veal. Everybody knows
that hens XE "chickens" would lay eggs if they could stretch their
wings. Maybe the eggs would be a little bit more expensive. So it’s much
harder for people to really get a good argument against you when you
tackle those abuses.

Hardy: Were you really pushing Henry XE "Spira, Henry" in this
direction?

Singer: I think I was, as I recollect it, yes. I can’t remember now
exactly when he moved in that way. I guess he had this campaign against
Perdue XE "Perdue" was one of the early ones. Maybe it was the first one
on farm animals. I don’t know. But, yes, I mean, we in Australia XE
"Australia" have been working in farm animals all the time. When Animal
Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" was set up at the
end of the 70s, we were working on the battery XE "chickens" hen issue
right from the start. Of course, we were also doing stuff about the use
of animals in research. But I remember the first t-shirt we printed had
hens XE "chickens" in cages on it. It didn’t have animals in labs or
anything like that. So I’ve been doing this all these years.

As I say, Henry XE "Spira, Henry" , probably rightly, thought that it
was necessary to build up some victories on a winnable sort of — issues
of winnable scope and that it was going to be harder to win farm animal
issues. That was true. He did eventually win some farm animal issues,
and since then the movement has won more. For example, if I’m right in
thinking that the Perdue XE "Perdue" campaign was the first one he did,
he never really won that, despite a strong campaign.

He also did one about kosher slaughter XE "slaughtering of animals" ,
which he won pretty easily XE "religion:Judaism" , pretty rapidly — not
against kosher slaughter XE "slaughtering of animals" as such, but
against the idea of shackling and hoisting animals, which was then part
of the kosher slaughter practice and which now, I think, is pretty much
gone but maybe not entirely still.

Hardy: It sounds like a nice segue to talk a bit about then the founding
of Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" and
what you were doing in Australia XE "Australia" . It sounds like that
was informing the conversations and thoughts you were sharing with Henry
XE "Spira, Henry" .

Singer: Yes XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r
"ar3" , it was. I didn’t found it, I should say. The first Animal
Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" in Australia XE
"Australia" was founded in Sydney XE "Australia:Sydney" by a woman
called Christine Townend XE "Townend, Christine" . The Melbourne XE
"Australia:Melbourne" branch, the Victorian branch — Melbourne was where
I lived — was founded by Patty XE "Mark, Patty" Mark. I think the
founding of the Victorian one happened during that period when I was in
Washington XE "Washington, DC" , DC, when I was overseas. So I came back
and there was this tiny group of people, half a dozen people, who would
meet in an old church hall and talk about whether we could actually make
any kind of impact on these issues. The Sydney XE "Australia:Sydney"
group had got going a little bit earlier, but I can’t remember exactly
when. But I did go up and talk with them, of course.

Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" was
organized pretty much that the states had their own independent
organizations. Once we got a few of them going, and there were a couple
of other groups that focused on animal experimentation and some that
were on domestic companion animal issues, then by, I think it was ’84,
we decided to try and draw them together into this Australian federation
XE "Australian Federation of Animal Societies" .

But we were successful in getting a lot of attention for the issues XE
"demonstrations and protests" \\r "pub3" . That was because they were
all very novel XE "media" \\r "pub3" . So we got journalists XE "public
relations/outreach" \\r "pub3" ’ attention. All we had to do was do some
little rally or demonstration. Whatever the issue was. Perhaps we would
be outside a fur shop that was selling furs XE "furs" . We’d get people
to donate old furs to us, and then we would bury them, symbolically bury
them in some earth in a bin or something. The media loved this, because
these issues had not really been around at all. Or whatever else it was
— whatever we did, we always thought of some kind of street theater to
go with it. But just the novelty of the fact that we were attacking the
treatment of animals, whether it was for fur or for research or for food
production, meant that we got a lot of coverage and generally pretty
sympathetic coverage XE "Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" . So
even though we didn’t win any quick victories really, we did alert
people to the nature of the issues and to what actually is happening to
animals.

Hardy: Why would you receive sympathetic coverage in Australia XE
"Australia" ? What is there in the Australian national character XE
"custom/tradition/culture" \\r "cult1" that — how does Australia differ
from Britain XE "Great Britain" or the US?

Singer: I think the movement received sympathetic coverage in Britain XE
"Great Britain" as well in its early days, somewhat less so in the US.
What’s the difference? I think there are probably a variety of
difference really. I think Australia XE "Australia" and Britain are more
liberal societies than the United States. The United States went through
a somewhat liberal phase, I guess, in the 60s and 70s. But by the late
70s, it was already pulling out of that to some extent.

The XE "religion" United States has a much larger percentage of its
population living in rural areas than Australia XE "Australia" . So the
Australian media are basically big city media, certainly Melbourne XE
"Australia:Melbourne" and Sydney XE "Australia:Sydney" . So they had a
somewhat different attitude to animals, I guess, from people in rural
areas. That could have made a difference. Australians are less religious
than Americans. A lot of people here will say, “The Bible tells us we
have dominion over animals, and they can be just flesh for our use” and
so on. Nobody in Australia would really use that as a defense of our
treatment of animals. It just wouldn’t go down well with most people. It
could have been all of those factors that gave us a pretty sympathetic
media XE "religion" .

But, as I say, it was also the novelty aspect, the idea that people were
this concerned about animals that they would do these things.
Undoubtedly it helped that there was an academic who had written a
philosophy book about this. By ’77 I already had a chair. I was a full
professor, which was also fairly unusual for someone who was thirty-one
then. So there was a bit of that sort of aspect of it too that got me a
lot of interviews about this radical young professor with these ideas
about animals.

Hardy: Can you tell me a bit more about the street theater XE
"demonstrations and protests" \\r "demo1" , how that was organized XE
"campaigning/lobbying" \\r "demo1" ? What events stand out in your mind
as classic XE "factory farms" \\r "demo1" examples of XE "chickens" \\r
"demo1" Australian XE "media" \\r "demo1" street XE "public
relations/outreach" \\r "demo1" theater in the defense of animals?

Singer: Look, I don’t remember them all XE "Animal Liberation
\[Australian group\]" . If I had my photo albums or something I probably
would. But we did the thing about furs XE "furs" that I mentioned. When
we did something about battery hens, we constructed a mock cage but
scaled up to human size. I remember I got in it with a woman called
Lynda XE "Stoner, Lynda" Stoner, who was a TV actress at that stage and
was quite a celebrity, a very good-looking woman but also someone who
was well known. She was a great sympathizer, and she got into the cage,
and someone else as well. I can’t remember. So we were outside the
office of the Minister for Agriculture XE "Australian Ministry for
Agriculture" . That kind of thing got us a fair bit of —

Hardy: When was this XE "Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" ?

Singer: Early 80s, but I can’t say exactly which year.

Singer: So you’re a full professor, and you’re getting into a cage on a
street corner with some friends that —

Singer: Yes, absolutely.

Hardy: Explain that to me.

Singer: Well XE "politics" \\r "pol1" , you know XE "psychological
aspects" \\r "pol1" , we wanted to — we felt that battery cages were
cruel and we wanted to get rid of battery cages. We wanted to try and
make this a political issue, because, I think — actually another
difference between Australia XE "Australia" and the United States is
it’s somewhat easier to get access to politicians and to get them to
listen to your interests without having hundreds of thousands dollars to
contribute to their campaign funds. The money doesn’t play quite as big
a role in politics as it does in the United States. So we wanted to make
this a political issue. We wanted to get attention for it. If me and
Lynda XE "Stoner, Lynda" Stoner and anyone else who would make it more
of a media event would do that, I was totally happy and I didn’t feel at
all uncomfortable about that, because I felt that the cause was clearly
a right one and I didn’t mind being out on the street in a cage XE
"Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" .

Hardy: This is a nice episode XE "managing an organization" \\r "man1" .
Can you sort of walk me through the sequence of events from who came up
with the idea to how the planning was done to how people dressed?

Singer: No. I’m not sure how much I can remember. I can tell you
basically. As I said, this group Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation
\[Australian group\]" , which started off as half a dozen people meeting
in a deserted church hall, did grow. After we got some of this
sympathetic media publicity, we started to become an organization that
had hundreds of members anyway, not thousands but still hundreds.

So then we did what you do. You elect a committee. I guess maybe that’s
not so obvious here, because most American organizations are not
democratically run organizations. But Animal Liberation XE "Animal
Liberation \[Australian group\]" in Australia XE "Australia" always was,
and many are so. You had a membership, and the membership met at an
annual general meeting and elected a committee. The committee elected
president and vice president and secretary and treasurer and so on, that
sort of stuff. And the committee would decide how to advance the causes
of campaigns. Those decisions were taken at that committee level.

Most of the time we did not have any paid staff. At some stage in the
80s I think we had enough money to have a part-time — pay a person paid
to work for us, but it never got to having a big office with more than
one person working, as far as I can remember.

So basically we would sit around and say, “What kind of tactics might
work?” If we had people who had some expertise in public relations or
media or something, that would be great, but mostly we just thought of
it ourselves. Then someone said, “Okay, why don’t we do this cage stunt,
and let’s see whether Lynda XE "Stoner, Lynda" Stoner will join in with
it, because she’d be a great person to have. She’ll bring the media in.”
Someone else would say, “I’m pretty handy and I could knock up the
cage,” or something like that, or “I know someone else who does this.”
It was all very much kind of amateur stuff XE "Animal Liberation
\[Australian group\]" .

Then we would publicize that we were going to have this event, this
rally or whatever it was, send out press releases, get all our members
to attend. We used the cage more than once. I remember on one occasion
we had it outside the minister’s office, and the minister agreed to
accept a delegation. So I think Lynda XE "Stoner, Lynda" and I and
probably Patty XE "Mark, Patty" Mark went in to see the minister.

Hardy: So you popped out of the cage and went in.

Singer: Yes, that’s right, to talk to him. I mean, in one sense we never
won that issue, because there are still hens in battery cages in
Australia XE "Australia" today. But in another sense, we created
attention for the issue. One thing that did happen is that we started —
we actually got the government to set standards for free-range hens. So
the government then said, “Well, if people are going to market eggs as
free-range, they have to meet these standards, and we’ll have inspectors
that will go around and check,” and stuff like that XE "Animal
Liberation \[Australian group\]" .

So you can now get just in your standard supermarkets, when you go and
look at the eggs, you have the standard battery eggs — which,
incidentally, also because of work from the animal movement now have the
words on them “eggs from caged hens.” Then we have basically barn eggs,
which are from hens that are not in cages but are still indoors in big
barns or sheds. Then we have free-range eggs. Anyone can have a choice
now. Unfortunately, the battery eggs are still the cheapest, so they
still have the majority of the market. But I think we’ve had some
erosion of that market for hens that are at least able to walk around
outside a cage.

Hardy: When did this change take place in Australia XE "Australia" ?

Singer: I think in the 80s. Certainly the free-range regulations would
have come in in the 80s. The “eggs from caged hens” words on the boxes
is much more recent. That took a long time XE "law and legislation" \\r
"law1" .

Hardy: Did this then precede Henry XE "Spira, Henry" ’s campaign against
Perdue XE "Perdue" ?

Singer: Yes. Certainly the initial battery hen campaign that we had in
Australia XE "Australia" was long before Henry XE "Spira, Henry" ’s
Perdue XE "Perdue" campaign.

Hardy: So you were really already not only thinking about this but XE
"politics" \\r "pol2" very active XE "business corporations" \\r "pol2"
in working to bring about political change in Australia XE "Australia" .

Singer: That’s right, yes. See, that’s right. Henry XE "Spira, Henry"
had a different tactic, and it was partly because of the different
politics of the situation. But we mostly at that stage worked
politically. We would try and get the government to do something. That
was sort of the first place you would go when you saw something was
wrong. With the exception of his campaign to repeal the Metcalf-Hatch
Act XE "Metcalf-Hatch Act" , the act about giving pound animals to labs,
which was a New York XE "New York" State act, where he did act
politically, that’s, I think, the only case that I can think of where
Henry XE "Spira, Henry" went through the political process, lobbying
congress, whether state or federal, to actually get the change that way.

Otherwise he generally had gone against a particular institution, like
the American Museum of Natural History XE "Museum of Natural History
(New York)" . How do you put pressure on that? Well, it wants to have
goodwill. It wants to have people donating to it. If we can convince it
that it’s likely to harm its interests, it will change. Ditto with
Revlon XE "Revlon" . It needs to have good PR image with its consumers
and so on. With Procter & Gamble XE "Procter & Gamble" and basically all
of those other campaigns. So his view was that, well, politics is a kind
of a quagmire that you get into and never get out of, and let’s see
where you can apply the levers of change with a corporation. Our view
was that the political system will be responsive if we get enough people
concerned about it, and that’s what we should do XE "Animal Liberation
\[Australian group\]" .

As I say, we had minor successes. In fact, in some areas we had more
significant success. I think, although we didn’t focus so much on it,
with regulations for the use of animals in research, we made more
progress than has been made in the United States today, I would say. We
made that progress maybe twenty or fifteen years ago. So, yes, you could
achieve things.

Then we sort of also learned from Henry XE "Spira, Henry" and from PETA
XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" , for example,
which also had campaigns against corporations, and we started tackling
corporations as well in Australia XE "Australia" . But there was a
different set of possibilities XE "Animal Liberation \[Australian
group\]" .

Hardy: Before we move on XE "demonstrations and protests" \\r "demo2" ,
I want to get XE "public relations/outreach" \\r "demo2" you to go back
to that cage again, because I’m very curious as to — how did you dress?

Singer: I think I wore an Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation
\[Australian group\]" t-shirt. We printed up these t-shirts which had
pictures of — they were basically white t-shirts and they had pictures
of hens XE "chickens" in cages — drawings not photographs — across the
top. I think I probably wore that, if I remember rightly.

Hardy: How long were you in the cage?

Singer: Not terribly long. Hours not days.

Hardy: Cold day, hot day?

Singer: Given that I was wearing a t-shirt, it must have been reasonably
pleasant, I think. I think it was reasonably warm.

Hardy: And you’ve got two or three of you crowded in there to
demonstrate XE "Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" .

Singer: Yes. I think there were three. As I say, I’m sure Lynda XE
"Stoner, Lynda" was one. She’s hard to forget. But I can’t remember now
who the third was. It might have been Patty XE "Mark, Patty" . It might
have been some other member of the committee. I don’t really know.

Hardy: Okay. So there are two or three of you in the cage. Then what
time did you all set up?

Singer: We would have set up in the morning sometime. I don’t know. The
time when there were people around, when there were people likely to be
on the streets. But I said, we did it more than once, I think.

Hardy: Then would have other members of the organization pamphleting?

Singer: Yes. They would have placards to hold up for the TV cameras XE
"Animal Liberation \[Australian group\]" , placards with photos of cages
or just saying, “Ban the battery XE "chickens" cage,” or a picture of a
hen. I think we had one which had a hen like this with her wings out,
showing how big that was, however many inches or centimeters that was,
and then a cage showing that the cage was so small that she couldn’t
stretch her wings, that kind of thing. And certainly giving out leaflets
as well.

Hardy: And what was the response of passers-by?

Singer: It was sympathetic generally. Not everybody, of course, but
generally sympathetic. We usually got some new members from whenever we
did something like that.

Hardy: What was the response of your colleagues at the university?

Singer: Some of them were amused by it XE "academic and education
profession" , that a professor would be doing this, but there were quite
a lot who supported it. They knew that that was what I was, I guess.
People made jokes when I got the chair already at Monash \[University XE
"Monash University" \], I remember. I was just going to be the chair of
“Animal Liberation Studies” or something like that. But they could see
that I was serious about a lot of other issues in philosophy and not
just about animal issues, so I wasn’t particularly worried about having
the respect of my colleagues at university.

Hardy: So no calls from the dean or a president, a private conversation
to talk about the public image of the university that needed to be
protected?

Singer: No, nobody, nobody, never. That never happened XE "academic and
education profession" .

Hardy: This sort of activity at that point in the United States would XE
"politics" \\r "pol3" have probably brought you some government
surveillance or concern — FBI XE "Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)"
or local police or someone to make — particularly with some of the more
violent actions that were taking place. Have you ever checked out your
file? Do you have the sort of domestic surveillance in Australia XE
"Australia" , or do you know?

Singer: There is some.

Hardy: Have you used the Freedom of Information Act XE "Freedom of
Information Act" to check your file here in the US?

Singer: In the United States? No. I’ve never used it here. I don’t know
if there’d be something on me. There was this thing — there was a thing
called Special Branch in Australia XE "Australia" . Something sort of
happened. There was a like a new — a Labour government came in, and they
said, “We’re getting rid of Special Branch, and we’re opening up the
files.” Then Special Branch said, “Yes, well, sure. We have to. Of
course, you’re the boss. You’re the government. We’ll open up the files,
but we’ve destroyed many of these files.” So I think there probably
weren’t many files to be looked at, you know. Then there was a bit of
kerfuffle saying, “Well, had they destroyed them under the previous
government or had they only destroyed them when the government said they
had to open them up?” But I never really had a look at a file. I don’t
really know whether I had a file. This was the Victorian state
government. I don’t know whether there was a federal file either. I’ve
really not taken the time to look.

Hardy: So at no point did you fear that your activism was going to XE
"violence towards animals and humans" \\r "viol1" lead to investigations
or repercussions, either American —

Singer: If people want to waste their time looking at what I’m doing, I
was happy to be completely open about it. I was never engaged in any
violent activity. I did engage in a small amount of illegal activity, in
the sense of trespass, for example. But, you know, I wasn’t hiding it. I
was quite open about it.

Hardy: In the United States and parts of Europe there were really these
serious rifts over tactics and strategy with the people who were
advocating non-violent, people who were saying that there’s a higher —
the same sort of divisions that you have in the civil rights movement
and other social movements. Did you have those same divisions in
Australia XE "Australia" between the monkey-wrenchers and the —

Singer: Not much, because there wasn’t very much violence in Australia
XE "Australia" . There was a small — I don’t know. I still don’t
actually know who it was. There was a little Animal Liberation Front XE
"Animal Liberation Front (ALF)" group that got set up that, I don’t
know, put superglue into the locks of butcher shops or scratched slogans
on the windows of fur stores. But it was pretty small-scale. I think a
few researchers got threats, but I don’t think anything ever happened to
them that I can remember. They got a bit nervous, and they increased
their security. But it was fairly small, and it never got the point
where the secretary for health or someone was sort of saying the animal
movement was terrorist or anything. Nobody would have used that term
about the Australian movement. Nobody really thought that we were
terrorists.

Hardy: We’re about done on this tape.

\[End Disc One; Begin Disc Two\]

Hardy: Where should we go from there?

Singer: I don’t know what you’re interested in XE "animal rights
movement/animal protection community" \\r "ar4" . It depends on whether
you’re interested in the animal movement, the international movement, or
in me and what I’m doing, or what.

Hardy: The function of the interviews is to basically document the
history of people who played significant roles in the history of the
animal rights movement and the liberation movement in the second half of
the 20th century. It’s an archival project. It’s not a broadcast or a
publication project. So the idea is to fill in the lacunae — what are
the missing details, what are the personal stories, what were the
relationships, what were the significant turning points that aren’t
documented in books or in other documents, so that when historians in
the future come back, they can refer to these and they can get behind
the scenes. Let me open it up to you at this point and ask you, what do
you think is not well documented or that you can share that will be of
interest to future scholars trying to make sense of what took place
during this era?

Singer: With a particular focus on the United States or internationally?

Hardy: One of the things I was thinking about was that my natural
interest, being an American historian, would be the US focus, but if you
have an international focus, it probably would be even more useful,
because then there wouldn’t be my inherent ethnocentrism showing up in
the questions and the nature of the material.

Singer: Because my view is that actually in most respects and for most
of the movement, the United States has followed rather than led.
Initially it followed Britain XE "Great Britain" . That was — the works
came out of that period in Oxford XE "Great Britain:Oxford" that we
talked about last time. I think Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation
\[book\]" had a major effect. Stephen XE "Clark, Stephen" Clark’s book —
\[telephone rings\]. Okay, let’s try again.

So that came out of Britain XE "Great Britain" . Britain was definitely
in advance of the United States at this period. It had this much bigger
movement. When there really was no movement at all in the United States,
there were events that were happening. There were the hunt saboteurs,
which is like a precursor of the Animal Liberation Front XE "Animal
Liberation Front (ALF)" that existed in Britain XE "Great Britain" .

There was much better knowledge in the British public about, say, the
fact that these animals were confined in cages and stalls and so on. The
Americans had never heard of it. When I left Britain XE "Great Britain"
, you could get free range eggs already in ’73 or whatever. When I left
Britain and I came to the United States, nobody knew what a free range
egg was. You couldn’t get them at all. In that way, it was ahead at that
time.

Then I think there was a period when new tactics were tried out here in
the United States, and that was particularly Henry XE "Spira, Henry"
Spira, I think. So you could say, “Well, tactically there was a period
when the Americans were showing the way and were getting breakthroughs.”

Then after that period XE "politics" \\r "pol4" , when the movement
started to lose steam, I think, a bit in this country in the late 1980s,
and particularly, as we were saying, they were branded as terrorists and
so on, not just in Britain XE "Great Britain" but in the European Union
XE "European Union" as a whole, the movement was politically very well
organized and started to become politically effective, so that we had —
I can’t remember all the dates now — but we had Switzerland XE
"Switzerland" banning battery XE "chickens" cages. I think that ban
began — it was phased in in the 80s. We had Britain XE "Great Britain"
banning individual veal XE "veal calves" stalls, and then not long after
that, sow XE "pigs" stalls being banned and phased out as well.

Then all of this happening at the whole European Union XE "European
Union" level so that different organizations for different countries — I
mean, I was particularly in touch with the British, with the Swedish XE
"Sweden" , with the Dutch XE "Netherlands" , to some extent with the
German XE "Germany" groups. They seemed to be the ones that were driving
it. But still they had to get support of governments around the whole
European Union. Then getting these agreements to phase out the worst
forms of confinement, which are still in process and haven’t all
happened yet across the EU XE "European Union" . But I think I’m hopeful
that they will happen, that nothing will come unstuck.

That’s far ahead of anything that’s happening in the United States.
That’s why I think that the United States, to some extent, has been
playing catch-up. That’s what we’re doing now in the switch to farm
animals that’s occurred as the major focus of the movement in this
country in the last — actually, I think, really in the last five years
during the time when I’ve been in the States. I’m not saying it’s
because of me, but that’s the period it’s happened. We’re really playing
catch-up with where the European Union XE "European Union" is now, and
to some extent where Australia XE "Australia" is. As I said, the
Australian code of practice of animal experimentation, although it’s now
more than a decade old, is still well ahead of anything that happens in
the United States.

Hardy: So who were the Europeans who were at the forefront?

Singer: I think XE "farm animals" \\r "farm2" that in the British group
there was this group called Compassion in World Farming XE "Compassion
in World Farming" , which was started by a guy called Peter — I’m just
blanking. Was it Roberts? Peter Roberts XE "Roberts, Peter" . Yes,
that’s right. Who I had met already in Oxford XE "Great Britain:Oxford"
, when I think I talked in the previous tape, about that very first
demonstration we had in Oxford on Cornmarket. He had lent us these
papier-mâché hens XE "chickens" in cages and a kind of stuffed felt calf
XE "veal calves" in a crate. That was a tiny group at that time, but it
grew and it became a significant influential group. Peter retired, and
it’s now run by Joyce DeSilva XE "DeSilva, Joyce" . She’s done a great
job. I think they’ve really been influential. They’ve linked up with
these other European groups who have been important in a lot of
different ways, and they’ve really learned how to make animal welfare a
political issue.

I should mention Richard Ryder XE "Ryder, Richard" , too, who, of
course, co-organized that first symposium and then became very much
involved in party politics in making it a political issue in Britain XE
"Great Britain" . I think that set an example. I don’t think Richard had
much to do with the European scene, but I think the way in which he had
shown how it was possible to make animals a political issue in Britain
was basically used in Europe as well.

Hardy: You had this close relationship with Henry XE "Spira, Henry"
where you would have these long-distance conversations about tactics and
targets and the rest. Was there anyone in Britain XE "Great Britain" who
you had a similar relationship with, or was that —

Singer: Not the same, no. There was no one that I was that close with.
Certainly with Richard Ryder XE "Ryder, Richard" , I was fairly close.
Whenever I was there, I would see him and we would talk. We would write
a bit, but we didn’t speak a lot on the phone, so it wasn’t as close.
There were some other people in the British movement that I had friendly
contacts with but not in that way.

Hardy: For your activities in Australia XE "Australia" , were you
following British models or were you pioneering?

Singer: I certainly looked at — I knew what was happening in Britain,
but we, I guess, did our own thing to some extent. It’s hard to say,
because I was reading the magazines, the animal magazines, they were
sending me. For example, we talked about getting the cage. It’s possible
that we got that idea from Britain XE "Great Britain" . I just cannot
remember really now whether we did.

Hardy: Just to leap out of sequence — I should have just jotted it down
and brought it up later — but you say in the last five years in the
United States there’s been a shift to an emphasis on farm animals. What
role have you played in that?

Singer: I’ve got back involved since being in the country but in a
relatively minor role XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp4" . There are
kind of coalitions of groups, I guess, that work on these issues, so I
talk to Gene Bauston XE "Bauston, Gene" of Farm Sanctuary XE "Farm
Sanctuary" , for example, about campaigns and sometimes talk to Bruce
Friedrich XE "Friedrich, Bruce" at PETA XE "People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PETA)" and Wayne Pacelle XE "Pacelle, Wayne" and
HSUS \[Humane Society of the United States XE "Humane Society of the
United States (HSUS)" \].

I guess XE "managing an organization" \\r "man2" I should mention for
the background \[that\] I’m now sort of the president of Henry XE
"Spira, Henry" ’s organization, Animal Rights International XE "Animal
Rights International" . After Henry died, he indicated to the board —
because he knew already that I was going to — did he know that I was
going to be coming? — yes, he knew that I was going to be coming to the
United States, I think. So he indicated that he’d like me to lead it.
I’ve done that, but it’s a very small organization and it doesn’t have
Henry with it anymore. Henry XE "Spira, Henry" was the driving force of
that organization, so I’m not going to pretend it’s got a lot of
significance. But it gives me kind of a little platform, I guess, and a
small amount of money that I can sort of throw into these coalition
ideas.

So, for example, we worked on the Florida XE "Florida" referendum to ban
sow XE "pigs" stalls in Florida, which was successful. That was
basically Wayne Pacelle XE "Pacelle, Wayne" and Gene Bauston XE
"Bauston, Gene" were the key figures in getting that going, plus a few
others, but I was certainly involved in discussing that. We had phone
calls and e-mails and so on.

Hardy: When did you become president?

Singer: Of ARI? When I came to the US in ’99 XE "Animal Rights
International" .

Hardy: What state was it in when you arrived? Henry XE "Spira, Henry"
died in September of ’98, right?

Singer: Mothballs. Right. I think you could say it was in mothballs. I
mean, it’s not really — it was never an organization that was anything
except Henry XE "Spira, Henry" and a bank account really and some
letterhead. Nobody else worked for it. Henry had a couple of women who
came in and helped him with correspondence. But they don’t — I guess he
paid them a little bit but not very much. There had been nothing to do
since Henry died.

The other thing is Mark Graham XE "Graham, Mark" , who did Henry XE
"Spira, Henry" ’s ads, designed the ads and I think is brilliant at the
concept of the ads but also very good at strategizing — he was another
of the people that Henry used, not initially, for the Museum of Natural
History XE "Museum of Natural History (New York)" , because I think it
was only then that he got — after that that he got involved. But for
many years Henry XE "Spira, Henry" used him as someone else as that
sounding board that he would bounce ideas off. So Mark is still around,
and Mark XE "Graham, Mark" is working with me, and he is someone who
gets paid a little bit. But otherwise, it was just sort of filing
cabinets of old correspondence and a bank account and a name really.

Hardy: When you took over, what were your first objectives?

Singer: I wanted to do something like what Henry XE "Spira, Henry" had
done, that is to find the places where you can make a bit of a
difference, where an organization that isn’t a large mass membership
organization can make a difference by — Henry would always say, “You
have to find a place to put your lever to move things.” It was to look
at those sorts of strategic issues, I guess.

Hardy: What was the first one you found?

Singer: I did want to work with other people about some of these things,
and I think the first thing that we did that was really successful
anyway was the Florida XE "Florida" pig XE "pigs" referendum that we
contributed to XE "veterinary science and medicine" . We’re now working
on a campaign to change the policies of the American Veterinary Medical
Association XE "American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)" , who
have terrible policies on factory farm XE "factory farms" issues.
Basically XE "business corporations" they’re in the pockets of the
farmers and I think are breaking their oath that vets take about concern
for animals. \[telephone rings; long pause\].

Hardy: What did you do when Henry XE "Spira, Henry" died?

Singer: What did I do?

Hardy: What was your response? Well, tell me about the relationship in
the later years. You devoted a whole book to him. Where I sort of was
thinking would be a nice place to start was about the role you played in
these developments that you allude to in the book but really don’t
feature.

Singer: Yes, but I think I’ve told you that. Most of the time I was not
there. The role that I played was to be a sort of counselor, advisor,
support. Occasionally I would be in the country and I would be able to
give a speech that was related to a campaign. But that’s about it.
Whenever I came to the US — at that stage, when I briefly came to the
US, I would stay with Henry XE "Spira, Henry" . I was about the only
person, I think, Henry ever invited to stay in his apartment, because he
was a bit of a loner in that way. But I would sleep — he had one of
these Castro convertible sofas. I would sleep in his living room. We
would spend three or four days chatting and talking about things fairly
intensively. That was really it until the time when, as I say in the
book, when he called me up when he knew that he had cancer and wasn’t
really going to be curable.

Hardy: Did his illness and death have any impact on you?

Singer: Of course.

Hardy: And were your ideas — my uncle just died recently, and I lost my
father when I was young. It struck me again where I just went through
that life review that takes place when someone close to you dies.

Singer: I don’t know about a life review, but I felt a great sense of
loss. I think he was a wonderful person, and he wasn’t there anymore,
and that was a terrible shame. I think, apart from the loss of my
parents, that that’s the greatest loss that I’ve had probably XE
"psychological aspects" \\r "psy1" .

Hardy: So what would you say — what are your prognostications for the
movement in the United States today XE "animal rights movement/animal
protection community" \\r "ar5" ?

Singer: I think it’s much healthier than it was. Let me say another
thing that I haven’t talked about but that is relevant to why I think
it’s healthier. I said that I founded or co-founded this Australian
Federation of Animal Societies XE "Australian Federation of Animal
Societies" , which brought together about forty different groups to work
with one voice at the federal level for animal welfare policy. When I
came to the United States during that period on visits, people were
amazed that that was possible. They said, “You could never do something
like that here,” because all these groups were at loggerheads. They were
at each other’s throats. They were attacking each other. They were
spending so much of their energy, which should have gone into attacking
the common enemy, on attacking each other. That was a real shame, and
they didn’t work together.

I’m XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp5" not XE "politics" \\r "camp5"
sure XE "pigs" \\r "camp5" exactly XE "factory farms" \\r "camp5" what’s
done it — whether it’s like a second generation of wiser and cooler
heads that have come to the tops of these organizations — but it
generally is possible now to work together. Not with every organization.
There are still some people who won’t work together. But as I say,
people like Gene Bauston XE "Bauston, Gene" and Wayne Pacelle XE
"Pacelle, Wayne" and myself — I could go on with another half a dozen
groups who do cooperate on these things and see the point of working
together on these campaigns. That’s very important and very helpful.

Hardy: Why Florida XE "Florida" ? Why did you all focus there?

Singer: There are various reasons. Firstly, you need a state that has
referenda, right? Obviously you can’t do it everywhere. Secondly,
there’s a question of size. California XE "California" , we felt, was
probably too big, too expensive to do advertising in California. We
couldn’t afford it. Thirdly, we didn’t want a state where the pig
industry was a major economic force, because then people would say,
“You’re going to bankrupt the state.” So Iowa XE "Iowa" or whatever was
out.

Hardy: North Carolina XE "North Carolina" .

Singer: North Carolina was out. I can’t even remember which of these
have referenda anyway. Florida XE "Florida" was a state of manageable
size, had — of course, you don’t want to do it in a state that has zero
pigs, because there’s no point in doing that. So Florida had a small
number of pig farms, sows in stalls, so it was going to make a
difference. They couldn’t say it’s just symbolic; it wasn’t quite that.
And also we had, I think, some local supporters in Florida that we knew
would support that, so that made a difference as well.

Hardy: How were the tactics different than in earlier efforts? What that
you all had learned over the past twenty or thirty years?

Singer: The fact that a number of groups were able to work together was
important. The fact that we were seeking a limited change, that we were
not going out there and saying, “Meat is murder. You’ve got to become
vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" .” We were saying, “Look, every farm
animal ought to have the room to be able to turn around.” That’s really
all we were saying. It’s very hard to argue against the idea that you
shouldn’t keep animals so that they can’t turn around, although the AVMA
XE "American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)" hasn’t got that
message yet, but one day they will. So that was, I think, the thing, the
pragmatic approach, the determination to fight a winnable campaign, and
the fact that groups could work together and therefore could bring in
enough resources to actually win it.

Hardy: Prognostications for the future? Where do see the United States
twenty years from now in relationship to treatment of farm animals?

Singer: I hope that it will have caught up to where Europe is going. I
really can’t be sure, because you do get some very troglodyte sort of
attitudes in this country really, people who don’t want change, who
don’t see the point of caring anything about animals. But I think
consumers, a lot of consumers, do. I think that can make a difference.
I’m hopeful that at least in twenty years we won’t have hens XE
"chickens" in cages where they can’t stretch their wings. We won’t have
sows or veal calves XE "veal calves" kept so that they can’t turn
around. We won’t have forced molting, which is something that hasn’t
really been done in Europe anyway. People in Europe are amazed that in
the U.S. you could starve a hen for two weeks. So I hope that that will
go. I think there are a lot of things that need to be improved.

Hardy: One XE "academic and education profession" \\r "educ1" of the
things you mentioned XE "ethics and morality" \\r "educ1" , I think, in
your recent New Yorker articles was about the —

Singer: New York Review of Books.

Hardy: New York Review of Books XE "New York Review of Books" . It’s
Friday afternoon. \[Laughter\]. I should be sharper, shouldn’t I? \[It\]
was about just the vastly expanded philosophical interest in animal
issues. The other person, of course, I’ve done two interviews with for
this project was Tom XE "Regan, Tom" Regan. So before meeting either of
you, it was always “Regan and Singer or Singer and Regan began this
whole revolution in philosophical studies.” Can we talk a bit about the
change that’s taken place there and the impact that it’s had on the
academy?

Singer: I think that, I mean — what’s happened is that it’s become a
part of philosophy or ethics curricula. It’s just an accepted issue now
in a way that it wasn’t in the 70s. Partly, of course, there’s this
whole area of applied ethics or practical ethics, which didn’t really
exist when I was a graduate student. That wasn’t what ethics was about.
Ethics was about analyzing the meanings of the moral concepts. But now
there’s this whole area, and it’s a very popular area with students.
Pretty much any college or university will have a course in ethics that
has some practical applied issues.

Almost any anthology that you pick up — you can pick one at random off
the shelf up there — will have readings on the animal issues. It will
have either me or Tom XE "Regan, Tom" or someone else writing on the
pro-animal side. Maybe we’ll find someone who writes on the other side,
but it means that students are exposed to the issue and they think about
the issue, whereas thirty years ago they would never have thought about
the issue. Everyone just accepted, “Of course we eat animals. There’s
nothing wrong with that. What’s wrong with that?” So that’s a big
difference, I think, that it reaches a huge number of people because of
that, and people get turned onto it. There are lots of articles in
journals about it published all the time as well.

Hardy: What’s the state of field at this point? How is it, in terms of —
I know in historical studies we go through these methodological —
periods of methodological interest, or social history will attract a lot
of graduate students for a while, and then the shift will be over to
anthropological approaches, and then the econometricians will have a
burst of interest, and then all the post-modernists will make their
assault and you’ve got this wonderful —

Singer: Actually, philosophy hasn’t really gone through that so much.
It’s quite interesting. Yes. I mean, take my book Practical Ethics XE
"Practical Ethics \[book\]" , say, which was published in its first
edition in ’79 and immediately became a successful college text that was
used in courses. Now, I’ve revised it in a second edition in ’93, but
basically I added two chapters. I didn’t change very much the old
chapters. And it’s still a well-selling text. It’s not as if someone
said, “Oh, this is not sufficiently post-modernist or deconstructionist
or whatever. We don’t want it.”

Generally the philosophy departments, in the English-speaking world I’m
talking about, are doing much the same sort of thing that they started
doing at some stage in the 70s, I would say. What they’ve done perhaps
is they may have become a broader department. A department of fifteen
people may have added someone now who does stuff about Derrida or
someone. But it’s kind of a — it’s still a fringe interest. It’s never
taken over mainstream philosophy. I think you can pick up articles about
the animal issues from the 70s now and you can still say that they’re
very much the same sort of thing.

I think the debate has got more sophisticated. People understand the
issues better, the interesting issues to work on. So I’m not saying that
it hasn’t progressed. I think it has progressed. I think David DeGrazia
XE "DeGrazia, David" ’s Taking Animals Seriously XE "Taking Animals
Seriously \[book\]" , which came out in the mid-90s, has a level of
sophistication in the debate that Animal Liberation XE "Animal
Liberation \[book\]" didn’t have in the 70s. But it’s still recognizably
very much in the same style of doing philosophy.

Hardy: So what was the sophistication that DeGrazia XE "DeGrazia, David"
has? What is the sophistication that DeGrazia has added in?

Singer: I think there’s more discussion, for example, of concepts of
consciousness and awareness and self-awareness and the relevance — the
difference that these may make between different kinds of beings. He
certainly accepts the idea that you can’t discriminate against beings
just because they’re not members of our species, but he asks questions
about different ways of being aware and what difference they might make
to the consideration you give to beings, which I really didn’t go into
in Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[book\]" .

I should say there’s also a whole lot more literature, of course, on
that very question, of what is animal consciousness like, which didn’t
exist at all in the 70s. That’s not philosophical literature; it’s
literature in biology, animal behavior, and so on. But a philosopher
like DeGrazia XE "DeGrazia, David" can take account of that and draw it
into his work.

Hardy: What impact XE "animal rights movement/animal protection
community" \\r "ar6" , from your perspective, having been at this for
thirty years now, do the philosophers’ musings have on social action?

Singer: Well, I think that I was really very fortunate in that I came
into this field when there wasn’t really any serious worked-out
philosophical literature in the field, and there was basically no animal
rights movement. There was the traditional anti-cruelty, humane society
sort of movement, but it had no philosophical underpinnings. It was just
about you don’t want to be cruel, animals are lovely, we should love
animals, this sort of stuff. So I think it was possible for my book to
have a sizable impact, a significant impact. Perhaps other books that
came out around that time may have had a significant impact.

But now I think it’s different, because the fundamental moves have been
made and, as I say, you can get more sophisticated in the literature.
But in doing that, you have to also become more academic in your
approach. So your average activist who has no education in philosophy
really to speak of — maybe went through college, didn’t do any
philosophy or did one course or something — is not going to have any
trouble reading Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[book\]" , but
they probably — they could read DeGrazia XE "DeGrazia, David" ’s book if
they took the time to do it, but they may find that it’s taking more
effort than they want. So in that sense, I think the philosophical
development of the field and the activist component have grown apart to
some extent.

Hardy: What about response of students? How has that changed over the
past thirty years?

Singer: It’s not as novel anymore. You get students coming to your
courses now who say, “Oh, yes, I became a vegetarian XE "vegetarianism"
in high school because I got some literature from some organization.”
That didn’t happen thirty years ago because there weren’t such
organizations. So you do get more people who know about what you’re
talking about. But otherwise, the response is not that dissimilar. You
teach a large enough course, you will certainly get two or three people
coming up to you at the end and saying, “I became a vegetarian XE
"vegetarianism" as a result of this course.” It’s never a hundred
percent. It’s never even fifty percent of the people taking the course.
It’s also usually not zero. That’s been pretty much the picture.

Hardy: What else do you think would be relevant? Again, I’m thinking in
terms of useful information for scholars twenty, thirty, fifty years
from now.

Singer: I don’t really know. I guess one thing we haven’t talked about —
but I wasn’t really involved in it; you should talk to other people — is
I think the rise of PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals
(PETA)" was very significant, because PETA became a real mass movement
with, I think they say now, 700,000 on their mailing list or something.
That hasn’t — that certainly — nothing like that has happened in
Australia XE "Australia" . Groups that have 7,000 on their mailing list
would be very happy. That’s huge. That undoubtedly has an impact. I
think that that’s something that historians will want to think about —
what caused that, what caused people to join this group in this way? I
think Ingrid XE "Newkirk, Ingrid" and Alex XE "Pacheco, Alex" deserve a
lot of credit for having been able to get publicity for what was
happening that attracted that many people to support them and increase
the size of the movement. But I think you should talk to them, not to
me, about that.

I don’t know. Other interesting things? Thinking back there were sort of
things that came and went. That’s another interesting study. Why did
PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" , for
example, boom and then succeed and still be there, whereas these other
groups — what happened to Trans-Species Unlimited XE "Trans-Species
Unlimited" or whatever? George Cave XE "Cave, George" , I think — was he
the guy who was behind that? I mix up sometimes the personalities. Then
there was this Mobilization for Animals XE "Mobilization for Animals" .
There was Richard Morgan XE "Morgan, Richard" , who was — the movement
had these various sort of people who looked like they were terrific at
getting people’s attention and building things up, and some of them just
disappeared. Five years later they were gone and you never heard from
them again, and others kept going. I think that’s an interesting issue
in study of movements and social organizations.

Then the other thing, I guess, should be said is, I did say, the
movement had, I think, a significant downturn at some point in the late
80s. It would be interesting to explore why that happened. Was it
because we got tarred with this terrorist brush? Or was it just that the
radical 70s had finally sputtered and come to an end? How is it that
after going through that trough, where things looked really bad, the
movement has definitely picked up again in the last few years here and
is more significant now than it was in the early 90s?

Hardy: Picked up internationally or more specifically in the United
States?

Singer: I don’t think internationally it ever went quite as low as it
did in the US. It seemed to me that it was sort of going more downhill
here, whereas, as I was saying, in Europe it was making political gains
and didn’t go down in the same way. Perhaps it’s picked up elsewhere
internationally as well. I couldn’t really say.

Hardy: How many children do you have?

Singer: Three.

Hardy: Three. Have your children embraced your ideas about the
importance of an individual and living according to one’s principals?

Singer: They’re all vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" . I guess that’s one
test. So I guess they have some commitment to that. But none of them
actually work in the animal movement. But I think they’re all doing
things that they think of as worthwhile in their own ways. I’m very
happy with the way they’ve turned out.

Hardy: Okay XE "ethics and morality" \\r "ethic1" . Let me go through
notes. One of the things we haven’t talked about — and this goes back to
my introduction to the current project — was your relationship with Tom
XE "Regan, Tom" Regan and what role he’s played, I guess, in the
philosophical development.

Singer: I think I did talk about how I met Tom XE "Regan, Tom" , didn’t
I, in the last thing? Or did we not talk about that? Because that
definitely falls into that earlier period.

Hardy: Yes. It was a brief mention, I think. You mentioned he came out
to Oxford XE "Great Britain:Oxford" in 1973.

Singer: He came to Oxford XE "Great Britain:Oxford" — yes, that’s right
— after my “Animal Liberation XE "Animal Liberation \[article\]" ” had
appeared in the New York Review XE "New York Review of Books" . I think
he contacted me and said he was taking a student group to Oxford XE
"Great Britain:Oxford" , and could we meet? So we met. We talked. We
obviously agreed about a lot, although we disagreed about the sort of
utilitarianism versus rights approach. Then we cooperated on Animal
Rights and Human Obligations XE "Animal Rights and Human Obligations
\[book\]" , the anthology. He wrote his first article on animal rights;
it came out about that time. He was down at that Blacksburg XE
"Virginia:Blacksburg" meeting that I mentioned with Jim Rachels XE
"Rachels, James" and Henry XE "Spira, Henry" . He was in that as well.
So we were pretty friendly at that time.

I think we’ve sort of grown apart a bit since, and we haven’t — we did a
second edition of Animal Rights and Human Obligations. It probably came
out in the 80s or something. We would see each other at conferences. I
saw him a couple of years ago at a conference in Washington XE
"Washington, DC" . We’re still perfectly friendly but not as close as we
were.

Hardy: And on the natural rights argument — how has that fared compared
to the utilitarian, for instance?

Singer: I mean, as I say, there’s common ground in rejecting speciesism.
That seems to me to be the crucial thing. Animal Liberation XE "Animal
Liberation \[book\]" is not really written from a utilitarian viewpoint
exclusively. It certainly doesn’t have anything inconsistent with
utilitarianism in it. But you could well read Animal Liberation and say,
“I’m not a utilitarian, but I agree totally with his arguments because I
think that animals have interests and we should take those interests
into account.” That may not be the whole of the moral story, but that’s
a part of it. I think that the appeal is wider than just to
utilitarians.

I think the problem with arguments about rights is how they’re grounded.
A lot of people just say, “I think we have these rights.” Some other
people say, “Well, no, I don’t think we have those rights. I think we
have these ones.” Then you’re just swapping intuitions unless you can
say more about this — why do you have those rights? One explanation you
could give is, well, we’ll all be better off if we recognize each other
as having those rights. Fine. But that’s a kind of a utilitarian
argument. That’s a real utilitarian argument. And if you don’t do that,
then it’s difficult to make that sort of claim.

What Tom XE "Regan, Tom" does basically is to rely very much on the
argument from marginal cases, as it’s sometimes called — that is, the
argument that says we give these rights to humans even if they’re not
rational, whatever. If they’re humans with permanent intellectual
disabilities that they’ve always had or whatever, we still wouldn’t
experiment on them like we do with animals or eat them and so on.
Therefore, we must — since speciesism is wrong, we must give these
rights to animals.

But Ray XE "Frey, Ray" Frey’s counter to that basically is to say,
“Well, I agree that we mustn’t be speciesist. But I don’t think it would
be wrong to do some of these experiments” — not all the experiments XE
"animal experimentation and testing" we do on animals. Ray doesn’t
defend putting shampoo in rabbits’ eyes or whatever. But the more
important experiments that hold hopes of curing major diseases, it would
be all right to do them on humans at the same mental level as animals.
Maybe there are some problems about how you formulate the law to make
sure you only get these humans, and there are personal relationships
that these humans have with parents and so on that animals do not. But
basically it wouldn’t be really wrong.

I don’t think that Tom XE "Regan, Tom" ’s rights position has a response
to that really. Tom wants to say that, well, you mustn’t do this, but he
doesn’t really have a good argument as to why you mustn’t do that, I
think. That’s, I guess, one way in which our positions are different.

And XE "campaigning/lobbying" \\r "camp6" I can also perhaps say that
tactically I think Tom XE "Regan, Tom" differs — whereas I was working
with Henry XE "Spira, Henry" very much on these pragmatic things, Tom XE
"Regan, Tom" seems not to want to do that. He had this phrase, “Empty
cages not bigger cages,” or something like that. I can’t remember
exactly what it was. He seemed to think that there was something wrong
with arguing for larger cages or room for pigs XE "pigs" to turn around
or something. We should just be saying, “Well, pigs are not objects or
property. They shouldn’t be eaten.” But Henry XE "Spira, Henry" ’s and
my view was that, well, that’s all very well in terms of an ultimate
ideal. We want to help the pigs that are there now as much as we can.
Since it’s just not politically realistic to expect that everyone is
going to become vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" in the short run,
therefore let’s have bigger cages, even if they’re not empty for a
while.

In other words, these are all stepping stones on the march, we would
say. Tom XE "Regan, Tom" seemed like he wasn’t interested in the march;
he was just interested in the destination. So there was that kind of
tactical split as well, which is a debate that still goes on to some
extent. Obviously, there are people who work to promote veganism and
vegetarianism XE "vegetarianism" , and there are people who do other
things. But now — as I say, this is one of the differences. Now we talk
to each other and we get on. We’re not generally polarized about this
issue.

Hardy: It sounds like you and Henry XE "Spira, Henry" really both have
this very pragmatic frame of mind, which brought you together XE
"psychological aspects" \\r "psy2" .

Singer: That’s right.

Hardy: Where do you think that came from in your own case?

Singer: I don’t know. Being a utilitarian, you ought to be pragmatic.
But whether I became a utilitarian because I was pragmatic in my
personality, or whether I became pragmatic in my tactics because I was
philosophically a utilitarian, I can’t really say.

Hardy: So you’re going to approach it from a philosophical not an
historical approach then? \[Laughter\].

Singer: I don’t know. I mean, I haven’t —

Hardy: Or not a biographical.

Singer: I can’t think of any moment when I suddenly decided that a
pragmatic approach was better than a kind of absolutist one. Whether it
was something in my temperament that I always thought —

Hardy: Family influences? Role models as a child? Formative experiences?
Anything you can ground it to there?

Singer: Not really. I don’t know. I mean, I can’t say. Was it that my
mother was this kind of person, fairly pragmatic kind of person? Maybe,
but I can’t view her with enough detachment and I can’t compare her with
other people’s mothers. They were never moral absolutists about things.
I guess that’s true.

It XE "religion" \\r "relig1" could XE "politics" \\r "relig1" also XE
"custom/tradition/culture" \\r "relig1" even be to some extent that
Australia XE "Australia" is a nation that tends to be more pragmatic in
its approach. Americans talk all the time about rights because you have
it in your constitution, in your Bill of Rights, and Australians don’t.
So Australian politics, you could say — Australian political discourse,
let me put it that way, is more pragmatic than American stuff, which is
based on rights and suggests that there are things that you must never
do because of these rights.

Hardy: In part it could be deeply cultural.

Singer: It could be. Quite possible, yes.

Hardy: Your pragmatic approach rubs a lot of people in the United States
the wrong way, particularly when you come into conflict with notions of
religious absolutes and rights.

Singer: Sure.

Hardy: To what degree have you been aware of the conflict that your
approach engenders?

Singer: I’m aware of it. I’d have to be blind not to be.

Hardy: How then from a pragmatist’s point of view do you — in the past,
did you respond to — particularly in the United States was clearly this
religious set of principles or beliefs that people based their
understanding of their relationship to animals with.

Singer: Yes, but —

Hardy: One of the things I’ve seen in the last interview and in some of
the readings is your acknowledgment that you’re not a religious person
and that you put religious ideas over here. But it really is a religious
worldview that is the grounding for so many people.

Singer: Okay. So what am I supposed to do about that? I mean, it
basically all seems nonsense to me, I have to say, this belief in a God
up there who created the world and looks after it. I mean, I can’t take
that approach just because a lot of people do. I don’t mind the fact
that there are other people in the animal movement, whether it’s Tom XE
"Regan, Tom" or Matthew Scully XE "Scully, Matthew" , say, more
recently, who believe in God and can write books that appeal to these
people. Fine, but I can’t do that. I’d be lying if I were to write books
about how God wants you to be kind to animals. That would be a joke for
me to do that.

Hardy: Right. But as a pragmatist, to think, okay, well —

Singer: I’m not a pragmatist about truth. This term “pragmatism” has
this American philosophical sense, that goes back to Pierce or John
Dewey XE "Dewey, John" or someone like that, or William James XE "James,
William" . I mean, I’m not a pragmatist in that sense. I think there’s a
difference between what’s true and what’s false, and I can’t say things
that are — I can’t say, “Well, because it would have the best effects if
I believe that there was a God, and wrote books about how God wants you
to be kind to animals,” therefore I can believe this.

Hardy: I was thinking, I guess — maybe I’m using the wrong term. I was
thinking more in terms of tactics and strategies — know thy enemy or the
nature of the people you’re attempting to convert. Because it is — you
really are trying to convert the way that they —

Singer: Right XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community"
\\r "ar7" . That’s true. Since this is for archival purposes rather than
newspaper headlines, I remember giving an interview at one stage. I
can’t remember exactly when, but it was sort of — it was for some
magazine that a friend of mine put out. Lori Gruen XE "Gruen, Lori"
actually, I think, was editing it. It must have been in the 80s at some
stage, after ’84, because I only got to know her when I was in Boulder
XE "Colorado:Boulder" in ’84. Where she or — it was a joint interview,
she and a friend of hers, I think — put a question about religion. I
said something like, “Look, I think the animal movement ought to
recognize that religion is really the enemy, because religion, at least
the Judeo-Christian religion, and Islam for that matter too, see this
idea of only humans having an immortal soul, God having given us
dominion over animals, only humans being made in the image of God. As
long as that is around, it’s going to be really hard to make progress.”

So I got a lot of — although it appeared in a very small magazine, I got
a lot of abuse for that. A couple of people in the animal movement,
American animal movement, took me aside and said, “Look, this is really
not helpful. It’s not going to help the animal movement to have people
saying that the animal movement thinks that religion is the enemy.”
\[telephone rings; phone conversation not transcribed\].

So I don’t say that kind of thing now. In fact, it’s great if you can,
as I say, have people like Matthew Scully XE "Scully, Matthew" who are
conservative Christians appealing to people and getting them to change.
At least for America, that’s really good.

Personally I still think religion is generally a negative force in this
country, and I think it would be a better place if people were more like
Australia XE "Australia" , if religion played a less significant role,
socially, culturally, politically. But that’s going to be a long time
before that happens.

Hardy: Okay. We could go on, but you’re busy and it’s a Friday
afternoon. That sounds like a nice place to end.

\[End of Session\].

INDEX

INDEX \\h " " \\c "1" \\z "1033" \\e " "

academic and education profession 16, 23–24

American Museum of Natural History (New York) 1, 2, 4, 8, 10, 14, 20

American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) 21, 22

animal experimentation and testing 2, 5–6, 6–7, 8–9, 9–10, 27

Animal Liberation \[article\] 26

Animal Liberation \[Australian group\] 8, 10–15

Animal Liberation \[book\] 5, 6, 7, 9, 18, 24, 25, 27

Animal Liberation Front (ALF) 5, 17, 18

Animal Rights and Human Obligations \[book\] 26

Animal Rights International 20

animal rights movement/animal protection community 2–5, 6–7, 8–9, 11,
17–19, 21–22, 24–26, 30

Animal Rights: A Symposium 3

Australia 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 10–19, 25, 28, 30

Melbourne 11, 12

Sydney 11, 12

Australian Federation of Animal Societies 8, 11, 21

Australian Ministry for Agriculture 12

Avon 8

Bauston, Gene 19, 20, 22

Bristol-Myers 8

business corporations 3, 8–9, 10, 14–15, 21

California 7, 22

campaigning/lobbying 1–2, 6–7, 8–9, 9–11, 12–14, 19–21, 22–23, 27–28

Canada 9

cats 2, 10

Cave, George 25

chickens 10, 11, 12–14, 15, 18, 19, 23

Clark, Stephen 4, 18

Colorado

Boulder 7, 30

Compassion in World Farming 19

Curtis, Stanley 4

custom/tradition/culture 12, 28–30

Davies, Brian 9

DeGrazia, David 24, 25

demonstrations and protests 11–12, 12–14, 15–16

DeSilva, Joyce 19

Dewey, John 29

England See Great Britain

environmental issues/environmental movement 9

Ethics and Animals \[book\] 4

ethics and morality 6–7, 9, 23–24, 26–28

Ethics Into Action \[book\] 1, 3, 5

European Union 18

factory farms 8, 10–11, 12–14, 21, 22–23

farm animals 10–11, 19

Farm Sanctuary 19

Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 16

Florida 20, 22

Freedom of Information Act 16

Frey, Ray 4, 27

Friedrich, Bruce 19

furs 11, 12

Gennarelli, Thomas 5, 6

Germany 18

Graham, Mark 20

Great Britain 2–4, 8, 10, 12, 18, 19

Cambridge 3, 4

Oxford 2, 18, 19, 26

Gruen, Lori 30

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 19

In Defense of Animals \[book\] 6

Inhofe, James M. 6

Iowa 22

James, William 29

Jamieson, Dale 4

laboratory animals 2, 5–6

law and legislation 14

managing an organization 13, 20

Mark, Patty 11, 13, 15

Maryland

Bethesda 6

media 11–12, 12–14

Metcalf-Hatch Act 14

Mobilization for Animals 25

Monash University 16

Moral Status of Animals 4

Morgan, Richard 25

National Institutes of Health (NIH) 6

Netherlands 18

New York 14

New York Review of Books 23, 26

New York Times 4

New York University (NYU) 1

Newkirk, Ingrid 5, 6, 25

North Carolina 22

Pacelle, Wayne 19, 20, 22

Pacheco, Alex 5, 6, 25

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 5–7, 9, 15, 19, 25

Perdue 10, 11, 14

pigs 4, 18, 20, 22–23, 27

politics 13, 14–15, 16, 18–19, 22–23, 28–30

Practical Ethics \[book\] 23

Procter & Gamble 14

psychological aspects 8, 13, 21, 28–30

public relations/outreach 7, 10, 11–12, 12–14, 15–16

Rachels, James 4, 26

Regan, Tom 23, 26–29

religion 12, 28–30

Judaism 11

Revlon 8, 9, 14

Roberts, Peter 19

Ryder, Richard 3, 19

Science \[magazine\] 5

Scully, Matthew 29, 30

seals 9

Silver Spring monkeys 5

Singer, Renata \[wife\] 1

slaughtering of animals 11

Smithsonian Institution 5

Spira, Henry 1, 2, 4–6, 8–11, 14, 15, 18–21, 26–28

Stoner, Lynda 12, 13, 15

Sweden 18

Switzerland 18

Taking Animals Seriously \[book\] 24

Taub, Edward 5

Townend, Christine 11

Trans-Species Unlimited 25

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 6

University of Pennsylvania 5

Unnecessary Fuss \[film\] 6

veal calves 10, 18, 19, 23

vegetarianism 3, 5, 7, 22, 25, 26, 28

veterinary science and medicine 21

violence towards animals and humans 6–7, 16–17

Virginia

Blacksburg 4, 5, 26

Virginia Polytechnic Institute 4

Wade, Nicholas 5

Washington, DC 5, 7, 11, 26

wildlife (in general) 9

Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars 5
