---
---

This edited transcript is the product of a tape-recorded interview
conducted by Kenneth Shapiro with Margaret “Peggy” Moreland Stathos in
Boston, Massachusetts on July 12, 2000 for Recording Animal Advocacy.

TAPES AND INTERVIEW RECORDS

The original tape recordings of the interview, edited transcript, and
records pertaining to the interview are deposited permanently at
Columbia University’s Oral History Research Office.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 - July 12, 2000

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

1

Happy childhood – Love of horses – Father’s love of animals; wonderful
mother – Classical music and musicology training – Becoming aware of
plight of animals with adoption of a cat (Susie) found on a Boston
street around 1953 – Susie’s disappearance in 1957 led to realization of
the use of animals for experimentation at Harvard University – Convinced
that vivisection is wrong; not yet aware of other kinds of animal
suffering; a strong sense of justice – Meeting and impressed by
Christine Stevens – Fellowship in 1958 to do graduate work as a pianist
in Berlin and Munich – Articles in NEAVS’ magazine Living Tissue –
Inspired by Albert Schweitzer’s “reverence for life” – Meeting pianist
Elsie Hall; impressed by G. B. Shaw’s interests in animals and
vegetarianism – Visiting animal shelters in Germany – Christian Science
Monitor and Hearst newspapers in favor of anti-vivisection – NEAVS’
President George Farnum’s response to Laboratory Animal Welfare Act
(1965).

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

More on Farnum’s tactics: fighting vivisection on moral grounds;
employment of investigator in 1930s; advertising campaigns in 1960s –
National Institutes of Health; increasing demand for research animals –
Social protests in the 1960s made an impression; characteristics of
NEAVS members at that time – Impressed by first Earth Day (1970);
Emerson and Rachel Carson’s views towards animals – John O’Neil’s
presidency; alternatives to animal experimentation – Picketing for the
first time at age 50 – Friend and activist Annette Pickett – Citizens to
End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE): early meetings in mid
1970s; members; its relationship with NEAVS – Protesting NEAVS’ annual
meetings in late 1970s.

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

Judge Robert Ford’s presidency: petition to repeal pound seizure law;
making grants for alternatives to animal research – Impressed by Ethel
Thurston – Sensitivity of individuals in the arts to animal issues –
Cleveland Amory became president in 1987 – Working in NEAVS’ education
department in 1990 and writing history of NEAVS – Beginnings of NEAVS:
Henry Bigelow; Philip Peabody – Closing thoughts: enormous increase in
number of research animals used in past 100 years; new groups and
tactics in recent decades; the importance of doing science without
animals; the problem of viewing animals as “things”.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

July 12, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts - New England Anti-Vivisection Society

Session of 2 hours

Interviewer:

Kenneth Shapiro (Vice President, Recording Animal Advocacy, co-founder
and executive director, Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Stathos. Lee prepared the
introductory material and index, except for the biographical sketch
which was supplied by NEAVS.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Margaret Moreland Stathos, a director at the New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS), has been a member of the Society since
1957 and has written extensively on animal protection issues for NEAVS’
publications. In the past decade her “NEAVS Library Project” brought
animal rights issues to more than a half million library patrons
throughout Massachusetts as well as to school libraries throughout the
United States. In 1995 she served as Co-Chair for NEAVS’ Centennial, at
which time she also wrote the 100-year history of the organization.

A concert pianist and music historian by profession, she has toured
three continents as piano soloist, performed in Europe under the
auspices of the U.S. State Department’s Cultural Program, and is
currently listed in the “International Who’s Who of Music.” She recently
completed six biographies of American musicians and instrument makers
for the “American National Biography” (published in 1999).

Margaret “Peggy” Moreland Stathos

July 12, 2000

Boston, Massachusetts

Kenneth Shapiro, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Shapiro: Hello, Peggy. Thank you for taking the time to join us. You and
I, Peggy, have discussed some kind of outline of where we want to try to
spend the two hours. My understanding is that we’ll begin with some
childhood memories but not spend much time on that because you feel that
you have the most to say and provide for an oral history in the later
period after your full involvement, maybe back in the 60s and 70s. So
tell us about your beginnings.

Stathos: Well, how far back do we have to go, would you say?

Shapiro: Why don’t you just give us a very brief idea of your early
family, where you were born, when you were born, immediate family. Who
was with you at that time?

Stathos: I was born and grew up in Salem XE "Massachusetts:Salem" ,
Mass., born in 1925. I remember a very happy childhood. I do remember
that once I asked for a kitten, but there was no reason my mother said
why I should have a kitten at that time. Of course, they were the
Depression years and I suppose that maybe had something to do with it.
Animals really didn’t enter my childhood very much until I started to
ride horseback in my teens XE "horses" . That was very exciting. I just
couldn’t wait to be with the horses. Riding was certainly one of the
highlights of my young life. But that was about the extent of animals
and my involvement with animals at that time.

Shapiro: Did you have any sense of your parents’ views towards animals?
They didn’t have a companion animal. Did they have any view that you
could pick up?

Stathos: Not really. I found out later that my father was really very
attached to animals. Later on in his life he was able to rescue cats and
kittens and always found homes for the kittens that I rescued. He was
very tender-hearted and had a nice agreement with the veterinarian in
our town that if he found anything that was injured on the highway, be
it a turtle or a muskrat or a domestic animal, the vet would take care
of the animal and not charge him anything. He used to say, “Phil, if
you’re good enough to find them and bring them to me, then I can’t
charge you anything for them.” So it did show that my father had a great
and big heart for animals. He was just so involved in business then that
perhaps he didn’t have time to show this side of himself more.

Shapiro: Did you see anything like that from your mother?

Stathos: No. My mother was just the best mother in the world. She was a
homemaker and I’m sure that she — I remember now that she was simply
busy from morning to night, in a delightful domestic way but in a way
that most women in that day were busy. I don’t think she really had a
feeling for animals like my father had. But she was warm and wonderful
in every other way.

Shapiro: Why don’t you just tell us a little bit about the horse-riding
situation. How did that work? What was your involvement there XE
"horses" \\r "horse1" ?

Stathos: Well, I just fell in love with them when I was six or seven.
For twenty-five cents you could ride a pony here and there in the
country, sometimes buy an ice cream and then have a pony ride. I guess I
was really hooked after those twenty-five-cent rides and then begged my
parents to let me go to a Girl Scout XE "Girl Scouts" camp, which I
think at that time was only twenty dollars a week, because I could ride
horses and go on overnight backpacking trips. It was just the highlight
of my young life to be able to be with horses in any way — to be in the
stable, to clean them, enjoy the wonderful smell of the horses in the
barn, and the riding itself. It was just a very great experience. That
was the extent of my love of animals though in the early days.

Shapiro: So some influence from your father and then your own interest
in horses.

Stathos: Well, my father loved horses too. He had ridden them when he
was young in the — I think it was the field artillery. The soldiers had
gone to the Mexican XE "Mexico" border. I asked my father once why he
joined the field artillery in Salem XE "Massachusetts:Salem" . He said
to ride a horse. So I think the love of horses was passed down.

Shapiro: What was the field artillery? Was that a military —

Stathos: It was a military unit. I imagine somewhere in the early 1900s
when our country felt we were going to have problems with Mexico XE
"Mexico" , the government sent the field artillery or certain units down
to the Mexican border to see that there was no trouble. But it’s all
rather vague in my mind now. But I have a picture of my father on a
horse in a parade. When he said, “Well, I joined because I did love
horses,” then I thought, “Well, this runs in the family.”

Shapiro: Do you want to tell us a little bit about some of your other
interests when you were growing up?

Stathos: It was all music at that time XE "music/musicians" \\r "music1"
.

Shapiro: When did that start, the interest in music?

Stathos: When I was, I suppose, six or seven and I had piano lessons.
But I knew from the time of twelve that I wanted to really enter music
as a profession. When I was sixteen I was highly motivated to go to the
New England Conservatory of Music XE "New England Conservatory of Music"
, which I did. Then I received a degree in piano from the Conservatory
in 1946 and then decided that I loved music history, or history in
general, so much that I wanted to get a degree in musicology, which I
did receive under Karl Geiringer XE "Geiringer, Karl" at Boston
University XE "Boston University" . That was 1949. Then my life was
really nonstop teaching and performing everywhere — actually all over
the United States, because I had a manager at that time.

Shapiro: You played classical music or —

Stathos: Classical music primarily.

Shapiro: Where do you want to take us from there? You were giving
concerts. You were traveling.

Stathos: I was.

Shapiro: Were you primarily teaching?

Stathos: Yes, teaching and playing XE "animal rights movement/animal
protection community" . Of course, there was no grassroots movement at
that time for the animals, but interestingly enough — of course, this is
the 50s when I was first out of college — there were organizations that
were forming in the 50s that were later to be very important in the
movement. But I knew nothing about them at the time. For instance, there
was the Animal Welfare Institute XE "Animal Welfare Institute" , and
Christine Stevens XE "Stevens, Christine" was very instrumental in
forming that. She became the president of it. And the Humane Society of
the United States XE "Humane Society of the United States (HSUS)"
\[HSUS\] formed in 1954. Then there was, I think, also another group
that Christine Stevens XE "Stevens, Christine" was very much involved
with called the Society for Animal Protective Legislation XE "Society
for Animal Protective Legislation (SAPL)" . That formed in ’55. I knew
nothing of that however.

Shapiro: You literally weren’t aware of these groups at this time.

Stathos: I wasn’t aware of anything. But something did happen in my life
in the 1950s that really made me aware of what was happening to animals,
and it woke me up in a real hurry.

Shapiro: Tell us about that.

Stathos: Around 1953 I adopted a cat XE "cats" \\r "cat1" , Susie XE
"Susie \[cat\]" , whom nobody wanted. It did change my life and also my
outlook on animals, because I was walking along Boylston Street in
Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" —

Shapiro: Let me interrupt. I just want to know what prompted you to turn
to a cat at that point, to turn to animals?

Stathos: Well, this is the story that I want to tell you.

Shapiro: Okay. You had nothing in mind about animals.

Stathos: Nothing in mind. I was coming home one day and walking down
Boylston Street to my apartment on Newbury Street. I had had a long day
of teaching, and suddenly I spied a kitten caught in rush hour traffic
in the middle of the street, on Boylston Street. I swept that kitten up
and I ran to the butcher as it was in front of a butcher shop. I said to
the butcher, “Is this your kitten?” Well, he couldn’t have been less
interested. He said — he shrugged his shoulders and said, “Well, we have
so many cats around here. I really don’t know.” I was very shocked at
his indifference and asked if I could take the kitten home, at which
point he shrugged again, so I took the cat home and named her Susie XE
"Susie \[cat\]" . I was very disturbed at what I had seen because it
showed the cheapness of animal life to me at that level with this
person. I suddenly realized that animal life could be very cheap, just
discarded as if it didn’t exist.

But I had a wonderful time with Susie XE "Susie \[cat\]" . She was a
great cat. She was with me three or four years. But one day Susie
disappeared. I was heartbroken. She did not come home. Then the medical
students at Boston University XE "Boston University" , where I was
teaching at the time XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r
"exper1" , taunted me that she probably had been stolen for experiments
at the medical school. So I asked innocently, “What kind of
experiments?” Then they described in detail some of the things that were
done routinely on animals.

Shapiro: This was news to you completely.

Stathos: News! I tell you it was. I was horrified. I remember I couldn’t
believe that such things went on, so I looked up the word “vivisection”
in the encyclopedia. There I read that, in the name of what they called
in the encyclopedia “medical science,” animals were routinely cut open
or had their nerves exposed or their vital organs removed. Sometimes
they were inoculated with diseases or starved to death. The list went
on. I was stunned. What really bothered me was this: I wondered how the
most educated people in our society could even think of doing such
things to animals. I didn’t care what the cause was. It was my gut
feeling this was wrong. I didn’t care what the cause was.

Shapiro: You didn’t know anything about the science, and that really
wasn’t of concern to you. You just thought it was wrong even if there
were benefits.

Stathos: I just knew. I didn’t have to read books of philosophy. I said,
“This is a hideous, horrible wrong that must be righted.” I suppose
maybe I was like — was it William Lloyd Garrison XE "Garrison, William
Lloyd" who knew abolition was right for the slaves and slavery was wrong
but he was tarred and feathered out of Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston"
one day, or they wanted to tar and feather him for his views? This was a
conviction on my part that there was something radically wrong with
society if these things went on.

Shapiro: Just let me take you back to Susie XE "Susie \[cat\]" and
before she was lost XE "cats" \\r "cat2" . Were you living with her and
just you or was there someone else in the house XE "music/musicians" \\r
"cat2" ?

Stathos: I had my own apartment because people didn’t want to be around
people like myself who had to practice six hours a day. So I had a
little basement apartment on Newbury Street.

Shapiro: The cat didn’t mind.

Stathos: I had to have photographs taken for several articles that
appeared in the Boston Globe XE "Boston Globe" at that time.
Photographers were always delighted to also take a picture of Susie XE
"Susie \[cat\]" who often slept on the top of the lid of my piano. I
have these pictures. I think Susie liked music and I loved her to be
there. She made the headlines more than once, my beloved Susie.

Shapiro: So she was really a primary kind of relationship for you during
those several years.

Stathos: It was beautiful. She did love music so I knew she was the cat
for me.

Shapiro: Okay. So you had educated yourself as much as you needed to
about vivisection at that point. You just knew it was wrong. Where does
it go from there?

Stathos: Well, I remember at the time I went immediately to the yellow
pages of the telephone book. I looked under animals to find some
organization that I thought would fight this terrible thing. There I
found the New England Anti-Vivisection Society \[NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" \] and the Animal Rescue League XE
"Animal Rescue League" . I promptly joined both, and I had no idea how
they were different at the time. But I saw the word “rescue” and I
thought, “Well, they’re for the animals.” So I joined both at that time.

Shortly after that — after this episode with Susie XE "Susie \[cat\]" —
I did become really aware for the first time of all the suffering that
animals were subjected to in the labs XE "psychological aspects" \\r
"psych1" . Of course, I didn’t know much else. I didn’t think about the
fact that I was eating meat at the time and wearing fur XE "fur" .
Vivisection was the issue that hit home with me, but I wasn’t aware of
the other things that perhaps I was doing in my life that affected
animals adversely or how all this was affecting me.

Shapiro: It was just companion animals at that time.

Stathos: At that time, yes.

Shapiro: Do you think if you had known about other kinds of animal
suffering you would have been sensitive to it, or do you think you were
just primarily moved by the companion animal stuff?

Stathos: I was so overwhelmed by this one issue I probably would have
taken to my bed in a dead faint if I had known how much suffering went
on in so many different directions. Of course, we didn’t think of those
things at that time. Many others in the animal rights movement will say
the same thing, that they were eating meat maybe right up until the
1970s or 1980s. A vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" was a very rare person
in my life. Then in the 1980s we received all of this material telling
us about the horror of factory farms XE "factory farms" or how animals
were caught in traps or raised on ranches for their fur. It never
occurred to us that we shouldn’t wear a bit of fur XE "fur" or eat
animals. All of this came about gradually. But I can say when it came to
vivisection I didn’t have to think twice about whether it was an
abomination and should be stopped.

Shapiro: Let me try that one more time in a slightly different way. If
you had learned about vivisection at that time but someone had said,
“They take mice and rats and do these things to them,” and didn’t say
anything about cats, do you think it would have struck you at all or do
you think you wouldn’t have, you would have just shrugged it off?

Stathos: I tell you, I had — in thinking back — more a sense of justice
in my heart than a feeling that I had to have a cat in my house or a dog
or another animal. But there is this conviction that I have always had.
It’s the issue of strong over the weak. So I do think I might have
reacted just the same way to the rat or the mouse. Who were we to do
this to another creature that was given life? Later I was to find out
that Albert Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert" felt this way, and his
philosophy influenced me greatly. I was able to say through him the
thoughts that I had, namely a certain reverence for all life that I
felt.

Shapiro: So you had that before you read Albert Schweitzer XE
"Schweitzer, Albert" . It wasn’t just that.

Stathos: A sense of justice.

Shapiro: It was justice.

Stathos: This is what was in my heart more than, as I say, a love of
animals or having to be near animals, to have them around me, that kind
of thing.

Shapiro: So your sense of justice was strong, and it included most
animals — animals generally.

Stathos: It did. It did.

Shapiro: This may be a hard question, but do you have any idea where
that sense of justice came from?

Stathos: Not at all. Maybe I would have done better in another
profession. But that sense of justice I had. That I know I do have.

Shapiro: So you joined these two groups but you weren’t particularly
active.

Stathos: I began to get the magazines, which I liked very much. I
remember George Farnum XE "Farnum, George" was president at that time.

Shapiro: President of?

Stathos: The New England Anti-Vivisection Society XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . But I do have to go back. I received
a fellowship to study in Europe, but I’d like to just mention one thing
that happened before I left Boston. This fellowship, by the way, was the
reason I couldn’t follow through in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" on
annual meetings at the anti-vivisection society.

After this shattering episode with Susie XE "Susie \[cat\]" and the
medical students, of course I was aware of what went on in the
laboratories. It was about 1957 that I read in Time XE "Time
\[magazine\]" magazine about a woman named Christine Stevens XE
"Stevens, Christine" . In the article one learned how she was fighting
to get something called the Humane Slaughter Act XE "Humane Slaughter
Act" passed in Congress. Well, I thought there is a woman doing
something for animals. I sat down and I wrote my first fan letter to
this activist. To my amazement, she wrote back and she thanked me for my
letter. She said if I ever were to be in New York XE "New York:New York
City" that I should call her and she would like to meet me. By the way,
Humane Slaughter Act for which she was fighting did pass in 1958.

When I was in New York XE "New York:New York City" I did call her. Then
I had the great pleasure of having tea with her and with several other
English anti-vivisectionists who were visiting her at that time. As I
look back, I think one was Major \[Charles\] Hume XE "Hume, Charles" .
At any rate, we had tea.

Shapiro: Can you tell us who Major Hume XE "Hume, Charles" is?

Stathos: Major Hume XE "Hume, Charles" had come to America to give a
talk, as I remember — it’s rather vague in my mind now — to advise
Christine Stevens XE "Stevens, Christine" and her group how they could
get an animal welfare act passed in this country. It’s a little vague
but I know we sat in her elegant Fifth Avenue apartment. I sat there
with Christine Stevens XE "Stevens, Christine" and all her colleagues,
listening to them talk that day. It was a huge inspiration. I felt I was
in another world. I felt I was with people who were going to change
things for animals. I thought, “Well, I’d like to be part of that
world.”

Shapiro: I know that was a long time ago, but can you get back any
impressions of Christine Stevens XE "Stevens, Christine" from that
moment, anything that struck you about her?

Stathos: Oh, yes. In the first place, she must have been a very kind
woman to write such a lovely letter to me in the beginning and then
invite me to her beautiful apartment on Fifth Avenue. Of course, she
traveled at that time in the best of circles. Her husband was Roger
Stevens XE "Stevens, Roger" , who was very involved and prominent in the
arts and the theater. She had contacts in both Washington XE
"Washington, DC" and New York XE "New York:New York City" , probably the
best. So when I found myself at her apartment having tea with all these
people who talked as if I understood everything they were saying — it
was another graciousness on their part. Then when I thanked Christine
Stevens for having this opportunity, she also wrote to me in Europe. I
joined her organization \[the Animal Welfare Institute XE "Animal
Welfare Institute" \] and she sent me all the literature from the
society.

Shapiro: The Animal Welfare Institute XE "Animal Welfare Institute" .

Stathos: That’s right — which I still have to this day in my files. So I
found her a very kind and gracious woman and probably a woman who was
very obviously determined to do things for animals. She had the skill.
It was all there and I felt I was in the presence of a wonderful woman
and a woman who was very admirable to me at that time when women on the
whole didn’t do things like that. They were more in the background.

Shapiro: I see. So you were impressed with her as a woman in those days.

Stathos: As a wonderful woman and then as a woman who was going beyond
all that she had to help the animals. I couldn’t help but be impressed.

Shapiro: She didn’t need to do any of this stuff.

Stathos: She didn’t have to do anything. But then my life changed.

Shapiro: You went to Europe. When was that?

Stathos: But before I left for Europe I was so fired up after I came
home after talking with Christine Stevens XE "Stevens, Christine" that I
applied for a position in the education department of, of all places,
the Animal Rescue League XE "Animal Rescue League" . As I say, I didn’t
know the difference between one organization and the other then. But
Earl Wentzel XE "Wentzel, Earl" , who was the vice president, thought I
would be very good at education and he introduced me to Carlton Buttrick
XE "Buttrick, Carlton" , the president. When Carlton Buttrick XE
"Buttrick, Carlton" found out I could only work part-time because of my
music commitments, I didn’t get the position. I was sad XE
"music/musicians" \\r "music2" , but I didn’t have a chance to really
think about it too much because after that I received a fellowship from
the German government to do graduate work in Berlin XE "Germany:Berlin"
. I left shortly after for Berlin.

Shapiro: This was to study music or to play music or do music history or
what?

Stathos: Actually, the grant was to do graduate work as a pianist in
Berlin XE "Germany:Berlin" . It was a DAAD fellowship, the Deutscher
Akademischer Austauschdienst XE "Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst"
award. It came from the German government. It was kind of a Fulbright
scholarship in reverse. They called it a Dankstipendium. The Germans
wanted to express their country’s gratitude at having been built up
through the Marshall Plan after World War II XE "World War II" and
wanted to welcome a lot of American scholars to Germany XE "Germany" .

Shapiro: Do you want to tell us something about your experiences in
Europe?

Stathos: A few that maybe made an impression on me that helped push me
along in this direction of the animals. When I went to Europe, I was
first in Berlin XE "Germany:Berlin" and later in Munich XE
"Germany:Munich" . I asked my parents to send me the New England
Conservatory — pardon me, the New England Anti-Vivisection Society’s
magazine, which was called Living Tissue XE "Living Tissue \[NEAVS
magazine\]" at the time. Of course, as a member I was getting this
regularly.

Shapiro: What does “living tissue” mean to you? Why that title XE
"animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper2" ? What does that mean?

Stathos: Well, when Edward Clement XE "Clement, Edward" became president
of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" in 1911, he
decided, looking back on the history, to study all the trade magazines,
such as those published by the leather trade and the piano-making trade,
and he came to the conclusion that if “leather” was the basic material
needed to make leather articles, then “living tissue” was the basic
material needed to do medical experiments. So he used that phrase
“living tissue” as a title for the magazine to publicize this fact. I
think this story is in the written history of NEAVS.

Shapiro: So you received the magazine and you started educating
yourself.

Stathos: I did. I received it as a member, but I remember reading it
from cover to cover each month as my parents would send it to me.

Shapiro: Was it scientific or moral in tone? What was it like? What was
the stuff of it?

Stathos: Of course, George Farnum XE "Farnum, George" was the president
at that time. Many of the articles were beautifully written by him. He
did two things in the magazine XE "ethics and morality" \\r "ethic1" .
He stressed the immorality of vivisection, but he also wrote eloquently
about compassion and the need for compassion in our society, because of
course everyone had the feeling at that time that science was God. Later
on I myself was to perceive that we lived in a society which was very
scientifically oriented, where science was God, and so forth. George
Farnum stressed again and again this need for compassion in our society.

There were also very fine articles by prominent people about the need
for compassion. One of these articles — one of the people about whom the
society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" \[NEAVS\]
wrote in the magazine was Albert Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert" .
The Society often wrote about Schweitzer and his philosophy, “Reverence
for Life.” That appealed to me greatly because Albert Schweitzer had
said that — well, I’ll tell you in a minute. I wrote down a nice quote I
want to share with you.

I had known Dr. Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert" as a musician. I knew
he was a great Bach scholar and an organist. I didn’t realize, however,
that he was a humanitarian and a philosopher. When I read his words in
Living Tissue XE "Living Tissue \[NEAVS magazine\]" in one of the
articles in the magazine, that “Ethics in our Western world has largely
been limited to the relations of man to man, but that is a limited
effort. We need a boundless effort which will include the animals,” I
thought that this was a philosophy for me. He became a great inspiration
and a great mentor in my life.

I have one other funny thing to tell you. I was so pleased with this
discovery that I remember when I first got to Berlin XE "Germany:Berlin"
I found Schweitzer’s book, Aus Meinen Leben und Denken XE "Aus Meinen
Leben und Denken \[book\]" , which means “from my life and my thoughts.”
I found it in German during my first months in Berlin. I totally
neglected my music studies until I finished it. I remember that did not
sit well with my professors at all, but that was something I just wanted
to do.

Shapiro: Did you know German or you learned it on that occasion?

Stathos: I had enough in college, and then I had to learn to speak it
fluently in Berlin. I knew enough to read it rather well. What I didn’t
know probably took me so long that I neglected my music studies. It was
probably not easy reading for me.

Shapiro: Did you have any other contacts around Schweitzer XE
"Schweitzer, Albert" ? You read all his stuff?

Stathos: Well, I didn’t read everything at that time, but I had one
other experience in Europe to do with Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert"
that was very important to me at that time. Shortly afterwards I was
studying in Switzerland XE "Switzerland" one summer and I had a music
master class with Rudolf Serkin XE "Serkin, Rudolf" . My landlady
observed me reading Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert" ’s works. I read
whatever was in the Living Tissue XE "Living Tissue \[NEAVS magazine\]"
or Aus Meinen Leben und Denken, XE "Aus Meinen Leben und Denken
\[book\]" things like that. She observed me and I think she was pleased
that I was reading his \[Schweitzer’s\] works.

So she arranged to have me meet and have tea with a Dr. Brack XE "Brack,
\_\_\_\_\_\_" , who had worked with Dr. Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer,
Albert" . I think it was at Lambaréné XE "Gabon:Lambaréné" \[in French
Equatorial Africa, now Gabon\] when Schweitzer first went to Africa. He
was one of the first doctors to go with him when Schweitzer went to
Africa.

XE "ethics and morality" \\r "ethic2" At that particular wonderful tea
he introduced me to Schweitzer’s book Memoirs of Childhood XE "Memoirs
of Childhood \[book\]" . I promptly bought a copy XE
"custom/tradition/culture" \\r "ethic2" . This book was lovely in many
ways because one could see that Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert" ,
from the time he was a young boy, had been aware of the cruelty to
animals and had, as a tiny boy, a very young person, anguished over the
cruel things that were done to the animals by young boys, his friends,
who, for example, would take a slingshot and hit the birds just to hit
something with this slingshot. So early on he did know that there was a
terrible injustice in the world for animals.

Shapiro: So you related to that in terms of justice and compassion. That
struck chords for you.

Stathos: It did, but my young life hadn’t been anything like that. I
mean, all this probably went on around me but I wasn’t aware of it. He
\[Schweitzer\] was super-sensitive to animal cruelty as a young man XE
"Schweitzer, Albert" . But he did say in that book, “Very little of the
great cruelty shown by man can be attributed to cruel instinct. Most of
it comes through thoughtlessness and inherited habit.” Then I thought of
myself — I mean, later I thought of myself and my habits because still
at that time I was eating meat and I was wearing fur XE "fur" probably.
Not in Europe, but I didn’t think anything of wearing fur. So this was
indeed an inherited habit. We inherit these habits to do certain things
in a certain way. We eat meat and wear fur coats without asking
ourselves, “why?” But I learned the wisdom of his words later.

What I did like was his concept that education was one of the key
weapons in the fight for animals and their rights XE "education" \\r
"educ1" . If you had an inherited habit, that habit had to be broken.
You had to be educated to see that you had a “bad habit” of wearing fur.

Shapiro: You say inherited or he says inherited. You don’t mean
literally inherited. You mean learned.

Stathos: Learned. That’s right. It’s a learned habit. Of course, when he
said education was one of the key weapons I thought, “Well, it is,” but
I wondered at that time how I as a musician with a musician’s life could
possibly ever do anything for the animals in that capacity. I just sat
there thinking, “Wouldn’t it be wonderful ‘if?’….” But I didn’t know how
I could be effective.

Shapiro: Because you were in education. If you could use education that
would be —

Stathos: I felt I had education in my heart and my soul as I had taught
so much. I thought, “Oh, I think I could do a good job at this.”

Shapiro: You had been exposed through Christine Stevens XE "Stevens,
Christine" with the possibility of politics and legislation XE "law and
legislation" , but that didn’t appeal to you?

Stathos: Right over my head. It went right over my head. I wasn’t ready
for that, I guess.

Shapiro: But education.

Stathos: I didn’t understand the import of what Christine Stevens was
doing on a legislative level. It all came gradually, a step at a time.

Shapiro: Okay. Other experiences in the Europe time?

Stathos: I think there was one other that was really quite wonderful,
and it had to do with George Bernard Shaw XE "Shaw, George Bernard" ,
who was highlighted often in Living Tissue XE "Living Tissue \[NEAVS
magazine\]" . Because he not only was a pioneer in this fighting of
vivisection, but his wit was so acidulous that he could just simply
devastate many of his opponents. I loved this quality in him as I read
about him in the society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" ’s Living Tissue XE "Living Tissue \[NEAVS magazine\]" .

Then once XE "music/musicians" \\r "music3" , I think it was one fall, I
had another unforgettable experience, of all places, in Monte Carlo XE
"Monte Carlo" . It was about 1962 or 1963. I had a concert to play in
Nice XE "France:Nice" , and afterwards friends introduced me to the
famous Australian pianist, Elsie XE "Hall, Elsie" Hall. Elsie was truly
remarkable. She had known \[Johannes\] Brahms XE "Brahms, Johannes" and
Clara Schumann XE "Schumann, Clara" personally. But there is something
even more wonderful to come. She was still playing beautifully at
eighty-seven when I met her. When I told Elsie XE "Hall, Elsie" about my
feelings for the animals, because we got in a talk about it after all
the guests had left, she said, “I could never wear fur again after
talking with Bernard XE "Shaw, George Bernard" . He made me aware of the
terrible suffering the animals endure for our vanity.” So I innocently
asked, “Who was Bernard?” She said, “Why Shaw, of course.”

I learned that Shaw had been a lifelong friend of Elsie XE "Hall, Elsie"
Hall’s and that he had reviewed her debut concert when she was nine
years old in London XE "Great Britain:London" in 1888. She said when
Shaw visited her at her home, which was then Cape Town XE "South
Africa:Cape Town" in South Africa, she remembered wanting to talk to him
about music. But Shaw had a very serious discussion with her
nine-year-old son Oscar XE "Hall, Oscar" about spiders and how
remarkable they were. Apparently, that was as important to Shaw as
talking about music to Elsie XE "Hall, Elsie" . I often read about Shaw
in the society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’s
Living Tissue XE "Living Tissue \[NEAVS magazine\]" magazine.

Shapiro: You keep saying “society.” That refers to —

Stathos: The New England Anti-Vivisection Society. We have a little
problem here. I don’t know whether it would be easier to use the word
“society” or the acronym “NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" ,” which it later became.

Shapiro: I just wasn’t clear. NEAVS at that time was called the society.

Stathos: Yes. And if it’s easier for me just to say NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" , which means the New England
Anti-Vivisection Society, I will try to say NEAVS.

Shapiro: I’m just curious, why was it called the society? Is that
because some of its people were from the Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" society?

Stathos: I think in that day and age the word “society” meant
organization. The word “society” is somehow a little bit more elegant
sounding than “organization.” But NEAVS is in essence just an
organization that was incorporated in 1895. In those early days members
called themselves the “society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" ,” as a handful of members still do to this day. From time to
time there have been those at NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" who have thought that maybe we should change the word
“society,” but it never got changed and I’m pleased because that was how
it was incorporated in 1895.

Shapiro: So it’s an old-time word for organization.

Stathos: An old-time word. That’s right. I might refer to the society as
NEAVS simply because we think of the organization as NEAVS now. If I say
NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" it will mean New
England Anti-Vivisection Society.

What impressed me about Shaw XE "Shaw, George Bernard" was to find out
he was a vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" . It didn’t mean that much to me
then XE "vegetarianism" \\r "veg1" . I just thought vegetarians were
interesting people, but no one had shown me why I should become a
vegetarian. There was no information to tell us about factory farms XE
"factory farms" . I thought, “Well, Shaw is a very interesting man. He
won’t even eat an animal.” But it didn’t register in my head at all at
that time that maybe eating animals was just as infamous as other things
that were happening to animals.

Shapiro: Did it strike you as peculiar that you couldn’t make that
connection at that time?

Stathos: Not at that time. Not at all.

Shapiro: But you knew that the animals were killed and brought to the
table.

Stathos: I suppose I thought somehow that an animal led a good life on a
farm and it was just routine that then they had to go to the
slaughterhouse. My head just didn’t get — it didn’t register with me why
we should not be eating the animals as well as the issue of why we
shouldn’t be testing on animals. But I do have to say this. After I
talked with Elsie XE "Hall, Elsie" Hall, I never wore fur XE "fur"
again. There, you see, it’s a gradual awareness. Then as soon as you
learn you say, “That’s behind me.” So fur was behind me.

Shapiro: Anything more about the Europe experience or do you want to
take us back home?

Stathos: I did come home in 1965 for good. I had been in Europe seven
years XE "music/musicians" . I had gone for only two, but I had had a
manager in Munich XE "Germany:Munich" and, of course, I did play
everywhere and it was just a wonderful experience. I had a chance to
play some concerts for the State Department and also in the Amerika Haus
cultural centers in Germany XE "Germany" . I loved every minute of it.

But while I did concertize in Europe, I did try to visit the local
animal organizations — they were mostly homes and shelters XE "animal
shelters" , I think, for lost and abandoned animals — because that was
at least a link in my consciousness with those that were doing something
for animals. I look at my files today and I still see these beaten-up
old pieces of literature that Germans had sent me home with about their
homes and shelters for the animals. Of course, I would try to talk to
them about vivisection. But for the most part, this was a Germany XE
"Germany" that was just recovering from World War II XE "World War II"
and the Germans had to think about themselves first. The idea of
vivisection was not really prominent in our discussions. They were
trying to get on their own two feet for the most part.

When I got to Munich XE "Germany:Munich" I did, however, find one
anti-vivisection group in the 1960s XE "animal experimentation and
testing" . It was kind of a mom-and-pop organization. The two people
worked out of their home, and the organization was called the Bund Gegen
Tierversuche, the “organization against animal experiments.” When I
visited, they sent me home with some of their literature. Although it
was only a husband and wife team working from the basement of their
home, they were there working against vivisection. I think it left me
with a great feeling that even far away from America there were people
that had the same sense of outrage that I did against this horrible
thing that was happening. I had a great respect for them working out of
the basement of their home and getting out that literature, which I came
home to the U.S. with XE "animal experimentation and testing" .

Shapiro: So you’re back in American in the mid-60s.

Stathos: I came back in the mid-60s. Of course, I had left in the
\[Dwight D.\] Eisenhower XE "Eisenhower, Dwight D." years when
everything was rather peaceful, and I came home to a country I hardly
recognized. The country was in turmoil over civil rights and the Vietnam
XE "Vietnam War" War. I just couldn’t believe this was the country I had
left seven years ago. In spite of that good things did happen for
animals in the 60s.

Shapiro: When you got back did you start becoming more active in animal
issues or were you still pretty much taken up with the music?

Stathos: No XE "media" \\r "media1" , not at all XE "animal
experimentation and testing" \\r "media1" active for the animals. The
time hadn’t come. When I returned to Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" ,
however, I remember reading in the Christian Science Monitor XE
"Christian Science Monitor" — I have to tell you, by the way, the
Christian Science Monitor was one of the few newspapers in the country
that would do articles about the anti-vivisectionists and show them in a
good light. The Hearst papers were another vehicle, another group of
papers.

Shapiro: Pro?

Stathos: You couldn’t say that the Christian Science Monitor was
“pro-anti-vivisection,” but it never hid the facts that you had to deal
with. So the Christian Science Monitor XE "Christian Science Monitor"
was one of our best friends as far as the press went.

Shapiro: That’s a Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" -originating
\[paper\]?

Stathos: Absolutely. Of course, the Christian Scientists believe in
spiritual healing, not materia medica, as they call it, so they could
see no sense in taking an animal and experimenting on this animal to
achieve health. Their philosophy, if you think about it, would not allow
this. Even to this day the paper still writes splendid articles on the
animal issues. So they were and still are our friends.

Shapiro: How did the Hearst papers deal with it? What was their take on
it?

Stathos: William Randolph XE "Hearst, William Randolph" Hearst just ran
great editorials about how infamous vivisection was. He was courageous
about this. We had on our side the Hearst papers, and although they
weren’t in league with the New York Times XE "New York Times" for
prestige, I tell you, they were to us because Hearst was so courageous
to write about all the things that had to be in print about how horrible
vivisection really was. The other papers were in cahoots, of course,
with the medical establishment and they would print very, very little
about all of that.

I did XE "laboratory animals" \\r "lab1" , as I say XE "law and
legislation" \\r "lab1" , remember when I came back reading in the
Christian Science Monitor that there were then many bills before
Congress which aimed to improve the treatment of laboratory animals. The
minute I saw that word “laboratory animals” it just jumped out of the
page at me. I remember I cut out the articles. I saved the newspaper
articles trying to figure how these bills were different, why was one
better than another. There was the Clark-Neuberger bill, the Randall
bill, the Javits-Rogers bill. Nobody, it seemed to me, could agree which
bill was the best. I certainly couldn’t tell at that point.

The year after I returned to Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" in 1966
Congress did pass the Laboratory Animal Welfare Act XE "Laboratory
Animal Welfare Act" , which President \[Lyndon B.\] Johnson XE "Johnson,
Lyndon B." signed into law. In a way, it was a landmark bill because it
was the first bill that ever addressed itself to laboratory animals.
Again, this great lady, Christine Stevens XE "Stevens, Christine" , and
her group, the Society for Animal Protective Legislation XE "Society for
Animal Protective Legislation (SAPL)" , which she and others had formed
in 1955, worked very hard to get this bill passed. President Farnum XE
"Farnum, George" and the society (or NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ) approved of it, but not with much
enthusiasm, because they felt that perhaps it would only put a stop to
some of the pet theft in the country.

This was an issue President Farnum XE "Farnum, George" felt very XE
"animal pounds:pound seizure” \\r "pound1" , very strongly about because
so many states had a pound seizure which allowed, of course, medical
establishments to go into the town pounds after a certain number of days
and take those animals if they weren’t claimed and use them in medical
experiments. Furthermore, at that time there was a huge problem with the
animals that were used not only from the pounds but also those that were
picked up off the streets by illegal dealers who weren’t licensed. So
you can’t say that this laboratory animal welfare act directly benefited
animals that were used in experiments.

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

Shapiro: — before the tape stopped that President Farnum XE "Farnum,
George" was, while supportive of the bill, kind of lukewarm on it. Why
was that, you were saying?

Stathos: Because President Farnum XE "Farnum, George" was at heart an
abolitionist. He had fought long and hard to get even the simplest bills
passed against vivisecting dogs and cats, animals that were close to
people’s hearts. He realized he couldn’t even do that and that perhaps
animal protectionists had to take a gradual approach to helping the
animals. He did feel that so far as pet theft went (which, by the way,
was heavy on his heart too because he knew how many animals were
collected illegally off the streets and sold to Harvard University XE
"Harvard University" by pet thieves with everyone looking the other way)
that the bill would at least stop some pet theft, which he knew was
rampant and which he deplored.

Shapiro: Tell us more about your contacts with Farnum XE "Farnum,
George" and what you knew about him and impressions you had of him. He
was president for —

Stathos: Thirty-three years.

Shapiro: So he’s a major part of the society, of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .

Stathos: Yes, and a major part of what I remember about the society XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . I do remember on a
short trip back to the States from Munich XE "Germany:Munich" one fall I
went to the society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’s
annual meeting, which was held at the Bellevue Hotel. I heard President
Farnum XE "Farnum, George" speak. He was a totally dedicated man, and I
couldn’t help but be impressed. He had been an assistant attorney
general under President Herbert Hoover XE "Hoover, Herbert" , which
takes us back quite a while, and then when he came back to Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" he was the president of the Melrose,
Massachusetts Humane Society XE "Melrose (Mass.) Humane Society" .
Shortly after that he became the president of the New England
Anti-Vivisection Society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" .

His philosophy and that of NEAVS, or “the society XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ,” as it was called then XE "ethics
and morality" \\r "med1" , was to fight vivisection on moral and ethical
grounds because there was very little else you could fight vivisection
with at that time XE "medicine/medical community:alternative
medicine/preventive medicine" \\r "med1" . There were no scientific
alternatives to using animals. I say that with one exception —
preventive medicine — which was an alternative. Interestingly enough,
preventive medicine was highlighted many times in the Living Tissue
magazines, in articles by very impressive physicians, too. I was amazed
to read these articles because these physicians were certainly decades
ahead of their time. You know, today prevention is so much in the
mainstream we just take it for granted. These physicians were absolutely
on the right track, but at that time preventive medicine was ignored
because it was not part of the American Medical Association XE "American
Medical Association (AMA)" agenda. It was not part of the creed or
philosophy of the AMA, and anything that didn’t follow what the AMA
dictated was not worth discussing.

Shapiro: Those tensions still exist with the AMA of preventive medicine
even though it’s a little bit more popular now.

Stathos: Absolutely. It’s almost gone mainstream.

Shapiro: Let me ask you, you say that Farnum XE "Farnum, George" used
the moral argument and the ethic argument. This was before \[Peter\]
Singer XE "Singer, Peter" and this was before \[Tom\] Regan XE "Regan,
Tom" . Can you remember at all what kind of language of who he used? You
had mentioned Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert" . What was the basis of
the moral argument? Was it Biblical? What was it?

Stathos: George Farnum was absolutely a firm believer in the Christian
religion XE "religion:Christianity" and its principles. As a matter of
fact, he himself was a good and devout Christian. But in this day and
age of diversity and multi-culturalism it would be unacceptable to some
to approve of some of the things he wrote. He would say, for instance,
“All good Christians must unite for this cause.” Of course, today we
know that we are going to have people who aren’t Christians \[e.g.,
atheists, Jews, Buddhists\] who are fighting for the animals. In this
way it is very interesting for me to see how much and how often he
brought out in his writings the fact that Christian morality would never
accept such a thing \[vivisection\]. Or that Jesus would never accept
such a thing. He alluded to the Bible again and again in his writings.
But this was typical of the culture of that era.

But he and the founders of the society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" had felt from the very beginning that if they educated
the public about the horrors of vivisection XE "public
relations/outreach" \\r "pub1" , the public would demand legislation to
stop it. So President Farnum XE "Farnum, George" did wage a very
effective educational campaign by means of this magazine, Living Tissue
XE "Living Tissue \[NEAVS magazine\]" , which was sent all over this
country, and also through advertisements in the metropolitan Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" papers.

Interestingly enough, Farnum made it very clear he didn’t want the
anti-vivisectionists to be confrontational in any way or to be ridiculed
by the public, because he knew that the public already thought some of
us were crazies and fanatics. There was no question about it. He didn’t
want any marches, demonstrations, or going to jail. As I look back now,
of course, these were the tactics used in the women’s suffrage movement.
But this was anathema to him. He didn’t want those tactics used. Of
course later on these same tactics would be used in the 1970s and 1980s.
But he felt that everything we did had to be on a high
non-confrontational level so that the public would take us seriously.

He did one visionary thing XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r
"exper3" that placed him far ahead of his time, so far as I’m concerned.
I think this is so interesting I must mention it. To my amazement and to
his credit, about 1935 he hired a man named Joseph Strickland XE
"Strickland, Joseph" , who was a Brown College graduate, to be an
investigator for the society. This is something we have today in animal
rights organizations that pays big dividends. But to think that he
conceived of this idea in the 1930s is wonderful. He had Joseph
Strickland go into the vivisection labs in medical schools and hospitals
in the Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" area and report exactly what was
taking place. To my astonishment, the hospitals and the medical schools
allowed it then. This was in the 30s and 40s.

Shapiro: Did he publish those exposés?

Stathos: He certainly did. What Farnum XE "Farnum, George" hoped to do
was to collect evidence about the horrible experiments that were going
on with the hopes that this evidence would make the legislators finally
demand that these experiments stop. Strickland XE "Strickland, Joseph"
did find the evidence. He was down at the Massachusetts General Hospital
XE "Massachusetts General Hospital" . He was all over the place. Then he
would go out to the Rotary Clubs and the Kiwanis Clubs and all these
establishment organizations and tell all about the terrible things that
he had seen. He watched a prominent Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston"
surgeon crush the gall bladders of dogs and then the doctor removed the
vocal cords so that the dogs couldn’t cry out in pain. He watched dogs
die of shock after being vivisected not only once but for the third or
fourth time. Then he watched animals being slowly starved to death in
nutrition experiments.

No matter how horrific these experiments were — and he would come back
to Farnum XE "Farnum, George" and tell him and then sometimes would
explain what he had seen at the annual meetings — those hard-boiled
legislators would never give in that these experiments should stop if,
as the legislators believed, they were helping to find cures for human
beings. Poor George Farnum XE "Farnum, George" was dumbfounded by this.

Then World War II XE "World War II" came and then it was a whole
different picture. But right after World War II he \[Joseph Strickland
XE "Strickland, Joseph" \] was doing this investigative work again.

Shapiro: So the shock effect was not that shocking to them.

Stathos: No, and yet George Farnum XE "Farnum, George" was prescient in
this way, that he knew it was important for an investigator to get the
goods on some of these vivisectors.

Shapiro: He didn’t get the stuff into the newspapers directly though, or
did he, the exposé XE "media" \\r "media2" ?

Stathos: No, he didn’t, because the newspapers wouldn’t print anything,
which is finally why he went to putting ads in the Boston Globe XE
"Boston Globe" . This is when he said, “Well, they won’t print this in
the papers. If they won’t print it, we’ll put ads in the paper.” So he
started this very effective advertising campaign. This was in the 1960s.

In a way, it affected all of us, because I distinctly remember one large
ad of Albert Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert" . This is in the 1960s.
Under the headline it said, “Dr. Schweitzer XE "Schweitzer, Albert"
denounces vivisection.” Of course, that hit home with me. Then the ad
said, “Join the New England Anti-Vivisection Society.” Farnum XE
"Farnum, George" put many of these ads in the paper. Thousands of
people, including several members of the present board of directors here
at NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" , remember
seeing the ads and being profoundly impressed by what George Farnum XE
"Farnum, George" put in the papers in the 1960s. They were young but
they remember those ads.

Shapiro: That was impressive also in the sense that that’s what Henry
Spira XE "Spira, Henry" used. He used newspaper ad campaigns later.

Stathos: Exactly. Full-page ads. He did indeed. That’s a very
interesting point that you make. He tried everything, everything he
possibly could do to win converts.

Shapiro: So the world war came along and distracted people from this
issue for sure XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper4" .

Stathos: Yes. And then for the first time it was kind of good for the
anti-vivisection cause because all the people in the labs who had been
vivisecting animals had to save people’s lives, so there was almost a
respite at that time from the horrors of the laboratories.

Shapiro: And after the war? You came back to the States in the mid-60s.

Stathos: That’s right, and the war was over. The 1950s and 1960s —
there’s no question about it — were a very low point for the
anti-vivisectionists. Of course, at that time in the 1950s I had Susie
XE "Susie \[cat\]" and I was unaware of all of that. But after World War
II XE "World War II" , the federal government XE "medicine/medical
community" \\r "med2" , through the National Institutes of Health XE
"National Institutes of Health (NIH)" , gave huge amounts of money — it
just ran into the billions of dollars — every year to institutions and
medical schools to do this biomedical research.

Shapiro: This was the founding of NIH.

Stathos: Well, it started —

Shapiro: Early 50s.

Stathos: The National Institutes of Health began in 1887 as a single
“Laboratory of Hygiene” with a budget of about \$300. It was a small
outfit out in Long Island XE "New York:Long Island" or somewhere. In
1930 it was called the National Institute of Health XE "National
Institutes of Health (NIH)" , and it was just one small modest building.
Then over the years it became something like thirteen or more different
institutes with a budget of — I think it’s \$15 billion each year just
for biomedical research. Perhaps you can fill in that figure for me. I’m
not quite sure, but I know it runs into the billions just for the
biomedical research alone.

Of course, the demand for research animals soared at this time. Since
science was God you could see that whether they were the leaders in the
press, in religion, politics — everybody it seemed was pro-vivisection
because most people considered it necessary for medical progress.
Science was so entrenched in whatever the good doctors at the Harvard
Medical School XE "Harvard Medical School" said or thought that I
remember this quote well that Dr. Walter Cannon XE "Cannon, Walter" of
the Harvard Medical School had written sometime earlier with such
arrogance. (But, of course, that was his job to refute the
anti-vivisectionists.) He wrote, “One of the three greatest threats to
society are the anti-vivisectionists.” One of the other two threats were
the anti-vaccinationists. The third threat were the practitioners of
alternative medicine XE "medicine/medical community:alternative
medicine/preventive medicine" . It’s so interesting today that so large
a segment of our society has turned to alternative medicine with or
without doctors. Dr. Cannon was not really very insightful in writing
what he did, but it was the way at that time. I never forgot the quote
and I just think how wrong he was — how wrong he was.

Shapiro: Did you attend the society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" meetings during that period in the 60s?

Stathos: Only that one that I can remember. Why didn’t I go to more
meetings? I suppose I was back in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" and I
was starting up my career again and there was no “activism” beyond
writing a letter now and then. The U.S. was in turmoil. I think, even
though we weren’t outwardly very active, this was the time when the
women’s rights movement XE "feminism" , the civil rights movement XE
"civil rights" , and the Vietnam XE "Vietnam War" War were making an
impression on us internally. These movements were introducing us to new
ways of protesting XE "demonstrations and protests" that we were hardly
aware of at the time. For instance, I can remember students marching
twenty abreast down Beacon Street past my front door in Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" protesting the Vietnam XE "Vietnam War" War and
then going on to the Common for rallies and demonstrations.

I didn’t realize it but soon a lot of us, who were kind of at “sixes and
sevens” wanting to do something for the animals, would actually be using
these same tactics and a decade later I would be in the Boston Common
with a group at a rally demonstrating on behalf of animals. It was all
sinking in, but we weren’t quite sure what was happening to us.

Shapiro: You weren’t activists yet.

Stathos: No.

Shapiro: How would you describe who you folks were at that time in the
60s XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r "arm1" ?
Who were the society people? Characterize them with a
socio-economically, religiously, gender. Who were the people in NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" that you bumped into and
were aware of?

Stathos: Well, once I met — for instance, when I went to NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’ annual meeting, I remember
there was not the feeling of being part of a movement or of knowing what
campaign one could work on for the animals. There were pleasant people
there, older people, no young people.

Shapiro: Older people. People in their fifties and sixties?

Stathos: I would say so. They seemed kind of old. They don’t seem that
old to me now, but they seemed old to me at that time. There wasn’t the
dynamism that you feel when we go to organizations today for the
animals. I didn’t know anyone really and I didn’t know how I was going
to get to know anyone who could explain to me how we could effectively
fight vivisection as individuals or as a group.

Shapiro: Were they mostly women? Do you remember that?

Stathos: I remember they were mostly women, but there were also men on
the board, some lawyers. But certainly people in the society XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" — there was not even the
beagle incident mentioned at the meeting. Do you remember the beagles
and the smoking incident? There was nothing —

Shapiro: Just say what that is for people. It had to do with cancer
testing on beagles, right?

Stathos: No, cigarette smoking tests with the beagles. That era seemed
to be the lull before the storm. I was in the middle of that lull in the
late 1960s.

Shapiro: Just a little bit. Were these people mostly upper-middle class?

Stathos: I would say that they were the ones who had time to care for
the animals XE "funding/finance" \\r "fund1" as individuals, but they
didn’t know how to fight vivisection beyond just being members of NEAVS.
Remember Farnum XE "Farnum, George" had said, “I’m not out for money.
NEAVS is the only organization that doesn’t ask for money as its main
objective.” It was only a dollar to join, I think, in the 1960s — five
at the most, but I think I have a card that states I joined for one
dollar.

Shapiro: So these relatively affluent people were still not giving money
really. They were just giving a very small amount of money. They were
just paying dues of a few dollars.

Stathos: Paying their dues of a few dollars. But Farnum XE "Farnum,
George" made it plain. He said, “I don’t care about the money. I want to
recruit members.” But bequests would come in. I don’t think they ever
got much money from their members because, remember, it was five dollars
at the most, or one dollar to join.

Shapiro: But they got some bequests.

Stathos: They were beginning to get bequests. When Farnum came to power,
I have read there were something like five or six hundred members in the
society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . By the time
he died membership was right into the thousands — five, six, or seven.

Shapiro: Which was around 1970. He died around 1970?

Stathos: He did. He died in December of 1970.

Shapiro: How much money was there at that point, do you think?

Stathos: I don’t know. But I know as far back as the 1920s they were
very encouraged with bequests. For instance, they’d say, “A bequest
finally came in of \$15,000, which means now we can start publishing
this or that.” So all along people apparently felt that it was
worthwhile leaving money to this organization. They weren’t huge
amounts, and yet the bequests kept coming in so that George Farnum XE
"Farnum, George" could carry out his mission of reaching people all over
the United States with the magazine and literature.

Shapiro: We’re winding up around the death of Farnum XE "Farnum, George"
in ’70 XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r
"arm2" . You’ve indicated that at that period members of NEAVS are less
activist. Anything else you want to say about that period before we turn
to the 70s?

Stathos: The lull before the storm, so to speak?

Shapiro: Yes.

Stathos: There is no question about it, it was a time of transition.
Before we really started to do anything for the animals, I remember that
there was no movement. There were just some very interesting
personalities like Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory, who had
founded his organization in 1967, the Fund for Animals XE "Fund for
Animals" . There were interesting and very impressive individuals that
were doing things, but for the most part we were at loose ends. We
didn’t know how we could be effective for the animals. But those
demonstrations in the 1960s had made an impression on us and we were
going to try a few of those tactics and either do them ourselves or join
local grassroots organizations which were springing up for the animals.

Shapiro: The activism of the 60s had an important influence tactically
on you?

Stathos: Oh, huge.

Shapiro: You mentioned Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory. Did you
have any personal contact with him or exposure to him?

Stathos: Well, I did, but that’s down the line. Something happened a
little bit later.

XE "environmentalism" \\r "env1"

I think the thing that impressed me before we started our activism for
the animals was the idea that Earth Day XE "Earth Day" took place in
1970. This was the first grassroots movement I had ever become part of
and the word “ecology” became part of my vocabulary. We animal
protectionists did see, when Congress passed these laws — the Endangered
Species Act XE "Endangered Species Act" in 1971, the Marine Mammal
Protection Act XE "Marine Mammal Protection Act" in 1973 —

Shapiro: This is early 70s now.

Stathos: Yes. Rachel Carson XE "Carson, Rachel" had written a book,
Silent Spring XE "Silent Spring \[book\]" , in 1961. All this, the start
of the environmental movement and the publication of Carson’s book,
showed that there was a whole new way of looking at nature, looking at
it with reverence and respect. I felt this new concept included the
animals. And although it would take time, I felt that this Earth Day XE
"Earth Day" concept was the ground work we should have in place in order
to further help and protect animals.

Shapiro: So this was news to you that there was ecology and habitat and
environment and these issues. This opened up for you.

Stathos: This was a whole new — this was a grassroots movement and this
was exciting because the animals were included.

Shapiro: You wouldn’t have identified as an environmentalist.

Stathos: Oh, yes. I had been an Emersonian, let’s say an Emersonian
transcendentalist and a Thoreauvian enthusiast ever since my college
days. Of course, I lived right next to Concord XE
"Massachusetts:Concord" and I was always at the \[Henry David\] Thoreau
XE "Thoreau, Henry David" conferences and everything else connected with
Thoreau in Concord.

Shapiro: What was the connection between \[Ralph Waldo\] Emerson XE
"Emerson, Ralph Waldo" and this transcendentalism?

Stathos: You should read his essay on nature and you’ll see how close he
was to William Wordsworth XE "Wordsworth, William" in thought. Both
revered the beauty and the importance of nature. Thoreau, like Rachel
Carson XE "Carson, Rachel" , also had a reverence and respect for
nature. Thoreau would look at the forest and wonder if there couldn’t be
another value for a forest than just to chop it down to build houses. So
he really was the grandfather of the conservation movement although he
appealed to fewer people than Rachel Carson at this time. But what he
said was true and wonderful. So his thoughts too helped to push and
steer this environmental movement in the right direction.

Shapiro: Animals were sort of tangential or not quite central.

Stathos: They weren’t quite at the center of the environmental movement,
although Rachel Carson XE "Carson, Rachel" had said that nature was here
not to be exploited but that it had an intrinsic value as everything in
nature is interrelated. That interrelatedness includes animals. So in my
mind, we were going in the right direction because the animals were
included in this new environmental thinking.

Shapiro: Her early books were critical to it.

Stathos: Absolutely. Here is her famous quote which impressed me: “We
cannot have peace among men who delight in killing any living things.”
She made her readers and public aware of the fact that animals too have
intrinsic value. They’re just not here to be exploited or to be utilized
by human beings. They have a value of their own.

Shapiro: Did NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" or
the society support actively Earth Day XE "Earth Day" , or did they see
it as a little bit off their page?

Stathos: I can’t remember because George Farnum XE "Farnum, George" died
at that time and John O’Neil XE "O’Neil, John" , who was the vice
president, became president. Then it was a very shaky time. NEAVS did
not go in that direction at all with John O’Neil. As a matter of fact,
there were some regressive steps that were taken which we as members
were very unhappy about.

Shapiro: Tell me a little bit about O’Neil XE "O’Neil, John" and the
regressive steps.

Stathos: After George Farnum XE "Farnum, George" died and O’Neil XE
"O’Neil, John" became president, he made it quite plain that — I will
call the society NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)"
now — was primarily and is still primarily an educational organization.
This displeased many members, like myself, who wanted the society XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" to be more actively doing
things combating vivisection. O’Neil didn’t do much by himself. But by
then there were many things happening for the animals that he, so to
say, latched onto, to his credit.

For instance XE "animal experimentation and testing:alternatives" \\r
"exper5" , he attended a conference in Switzerland XE "Switzerland" at
which non-animal methods of research were discussed. It was called the
International Association Against Painful Experiments in Animals XE
"International Association Against Painful Experiments in Animals" , and
I’m just going to call it IAAPEA. I have no idea how to pronounce it.
But actually I found out that the society XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" had joined IAAPEA under Farnum’s
presidency. I think Farnum XE "Farnum, George" would have been ecstatic
to have lived long enough to have experienced such a breakthrough
conference showing what could be done for the animals, because this idea
that there were non-animal ways of doing research was very new and very
exciting. It was an entirely new branch of science. Here was medical
science devastating animal life with experiments, yet this same science
showed that it was capable of coming up with answers, new non-animal
technologies, that were going to help us in our pursuit to get the
animals out of the labs.

This concept that alternatives to animals in experiments could be used,
like tissue, cell, and organ cultures, was to really catapult NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" and a lot of other
organizations into a whole new world of fighting vivisection, because
they’d had nothing but the moral issue and argument to work with before.
Now science was providing them with some new tools. By the late 1980s I
remember reading in Henry Spira XE "Spira, Henry" ’s reports that
computers and computer modeling also had to be added to all those
wonderful alternatives that were going to help replace animals in
experiments.

So this is new and exciting. In spite of the fact that O’Neil XE
"O’Neil, John" was basically a very conservative man, and he was still
talking about educating the public XE "animal rights movement/animal
protection community" .

Shapiro: Still moral arguments.

Stathos: Yes. We just felt all of this thinking has to go and be
replaced because we were part of the environmental movement now and we
were seeing exciting things happening in all directions. We said, “This
new thinking is the direction in which we have to go.” So then Cleveland
XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory came into my life a little bit.

Shapiro: Tell me about that.

Stathos: I XE "fur" \\r "fur1" , too XE "demonstrations and protests"
\\r "fur1" , was breaking new ground at this time. I was about fifty, I
guess, then when I was breaking all this new ground. I picketed for the
first time in front of KaKas’ Fur store in Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" with a group. The group was organized by the Fund
for Animals XE "Fund for Animals" which Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland"
Amory had formed in 1967. He was later to become president of NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . It was the first time I
had done such a thing.

I remember going to Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" on the train from
suburban Lincoln XE "Massachusetts:Lincoln" with my friend Annette XE
"Pickett, Annette" Pickett, who is now also on the board of NEAVS XE
"New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . She had written these
wonderful signs like “Your coat! What a rip-off for animals!” We went in
with our signs. It was the first time I had done anything like that. I
think picketing agreed with all of us.

Shapiro: That must have been a shift for you. You’re a concert pianist
and world traveler and living out in the ‘burbs, and you’re on the
streets.

Stathos: I was on the streets, and Annette XE "Pickett, Annette" was
too. We were two suburbanites with families. But we were both beginning
to do things outside the home for the animals.

Shapiro: Was that done out of some sense of frustration with other
methods XE "education" ? How was it that you got to that?

Stathos: I think, as I say, we were just waiting for this day to come
when we could do more. The minute this opportunity came I didn’t think,
“Well, should I or shouldn’t I?” I thought, “I’ve been waiting for this
— to be able to do this.” This is what we wanted to do.

Shapiro: So perhaps there was some sense that the straight education
route was not effective enough?

Stathos: Not enough. A lot of us felt that, as much as George Farnum XE
"Farnum, George" had succeeded with his educational projects, in this
day of activism it was now not enough. We had to do more XE "education"
.

Shapiro: Annette XE "Pickett, Annette" Pickett. Tell me about her. What
do you remember about her?

Stathos: Well, I have to start with Dorothy XE "O’Brien, Dorothy"
O’Brien, a very effective and wonderful lobbyist for animals here in
Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . There was a piece about her in the
Boston Globe XE "Boston Globe" in 1975. I wrote my second fan letter and
I said, “Thank you for doing so much for the animals. If you can ever
use me in any way, let me know,” because I felt activism now was the way
we wanted to go. We wanted to hold up those signs, do all the things
that had been so effective in the other movements of the 1960s. So I
wrote her the fan letter and she said, “There’s another woman in your
town, Lincoln XE "Massachusetts:Lincoln" , whom you really should get to
know, and her name is Annette XE "Pickett, Annette" Pickett. She also is
very —.”

Well, I wrote a letter to “Mrs. Pickett” XE "Pickett, Annette" and said
I’d like to meet her and, of course, after that we became fast friends.
We found that we were about the only two people in Lincoln XE
"Massachusetts:Lincoln" who were really animal activists, and the rest
of the town thought we were a little crazy, even the minister.

Shapiro: Was Annette XE "Pickett, Annette" in NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ?

Stathos: She became a lifelong member of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .

Shapiro: Okay. Was she in any other organizations?

Stathos: Yes. She had worked for Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory
at the World’s Fair in New York XE "New York:New York City" in the early
1960s. She was a vegetarian XE "vegetarianism" from the age of seven.
She was really committed in many ways to the animal cause. She was just
waiting for the movement to be born, and she was so effective in it.

Shapiro: What was she professionally? Just tell us more about her.

Stathos: She had done many things.

Shapiro: She is a figure that is recognized in the movement, but I have
not read much about her. What else can you tell us about her?

Stathos: She had done many things professionally. She had been on Wall
Street with her father and she had taught in many schools.

Shapiro: Economic stuff? Financial stuff? Teaching?

Stathos: Financial with her father. She was a stockbroker in New York.
Also she was an educator. She had held many positions in both public and
private schools as an English teacher. But when she moved to Lincoln XE
"Massachusetts:Lincoln" she was raising small children, as was I, and we
got together. Then I found out how radical she was. Our children were
still very young. I loved her for this radicalism and for her conviction
of what we must do for animals.

Of course, I will never forget our minister XE "religion" who gave a
sermon in Lincoln XE "Massachusetts:Lincoln" and said, “Of course it is
sad we have to use animals in experiments, but of course we have to use
them.” He went on to make this point. Annette XE "Pickett, Annette" and
I were both just absolutely shocked that this should come from the
pulpit. I think we had a talk with him, and he found us a little odd
that we would really object to this.

Then later on he moved to California XE "California" . Where did they
have all the riots over the animals? It was Berkeley XE
"California:Berkeley" where the animal rights movement really broke out.
The minister thought we really were a little odd. But after he moved to
Berkeley, I thought, “Well, he’s finding out. He’s in the thick of
things and now he knows why we felt that way.”

Annette XE "Pickett, Annette" became extremely effective in the
movement. She was the northeastern coordinator for the Mobilization for
Animals XE "Mobilization for Animals" which took place in 1982 and she
also wrote an excellent newsletter for the Mobilization. She was just a
sterling person and absolutely devoted to helping the animals. Of
course, from that time (the 1960s), we’ve been friends ever since and
now find ourselves both on the board of NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . But then we appeared to be “wild
people” to most of our suburban town citizens, I tell you. We had to
keep a lot of our thoughts to ourselves. We started writing letters to
the local editors on the fur XE "fur" issues. Annette would say, “I need
a letter from you, Peggy. Will you write it?” Then we’d write to our
local papers to fight the fur people, the trappers.

Then Dorothy XE "O’Brien, Dorothy" O’Brien was always there to give us a
lot of advice XE "managing an organization" \\r "org1" . We found a lot
of camaraderie in our little circle right there in Boston XE
"Massachusetts:Boston" — Dorothy XE "O’Brien, Dorothy" O’Brien, Annette
XE "Pickett, Annette" , myself, Lorraine XE "Roth, Lorraine" Roth, who
was the founder or one of the founders of CEASE XE "Citizens to End
Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" , the Citizens to End Animal
Exploitation and Suffering.

Shapiro: Suffering and Exploitation.

Stathos: So Lorraine XE "Roth, Lorraine" was one of the great local
people that we had XE "animal rights movement/animal protection
community" in our midst. We formed a little group and then we found
ourselves joining this local group called CEASE XE "Citizens to End
Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" , which was a newly-formed
grassroots organization.

Shapiro: Still all women pretty much?

Stathos: When we joined CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and
Exploitation (CEASE)" we found it had a handful men then in the
organization, which was very nice.

Shapiro: Still mostly middle class and upper-middle class?

Stathos: I wouldn’t say so, for the first time. Although Annette XE
"Pickett, Annette" and I, you might have categorized us this way, a lot
of young people that were in college that didn’t have any money were
there. They just had conviction.

Shapiro: This is the first time you are noticing that.

Stathos: The first time when we joined CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal
Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" , and I can tell you a little bit
about those early meetings. I think they’re just so interesting.

We were dissatisfied. We didn’t know what to do. We were disgruntled
with NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" in general.
We joined this local activist group called CEASE XE "Citizens to End
Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" . As I say, it was the
Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation. It was a newly-formed
group, and soon a lot of us went regularly to the meetings.

I went with Annette XE "Pickett, Annette" . We’d drive to Brookline XE
"Massachusetts:Brookline" . We met in the basement of a church. We’d
pass the hat so that maybe we’d get twenty-five dollars, and with that
twenty-five dollars a group of the bright ones with writing skills would
write up the little leaflets and emblazon some t-shirts with animals
rights slogans or whatever we wanted to put on the shirt. Then we’d meet
at Harvard Square or other towns on weekends and give out the leaflets
and the t-shirts. But I never forgot the hat that was passed, because if
we got more than twenty-five dollars I suppose I thought it was great.

So Sandi Larson XE "Larson, Sandra" walked in one day I remember. Then
there was Mary de La Valette XE "de La Valette, Mary" . She walked in
with her dog. Evelyn Kimber XE "Kimber, Evelyn" had just come to Boston
and said, “I’ve only been here a year but I’d like to do something for
animals rights at my church.” There was Annette XE "Pickett, Annette"
and myself. Later on Gul Agha XE "Agha, Gul" came, who was from MIT
\[Massachusetts Institute of Technology XE "Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT)" \]. He had a lot of organizational sense and later
became president. There was — oh, I wish I could think of some of the
others. Lorraine Roth was there.

Shapiro: What about de La Valette XE "de La Valette, Mary" ? What can
you tell us about her? Was that her name?

Stathos: Mary de La Valette. She was just always a very, very strong
figure. From the very beginning she was there to do her part. She was
very innovative in all the things she wanted to do. She started an
animal rights TV show. It was, I think, on cable television. She was
wonderful with a pen. She was just marvelous with the letters she could
write. She had a biting sarcasm that reminded me of \[G. B.\] Shaw’s XE
"Shaw, George Bernard" . She could just lay flat her opponents. Mary
weaves in and out of my life as I do in hers, when it comes to the
animals. She is always there for the demonstrations, the protests, and
other activist things. Now she’s put together or she’s putting together
something very innovative that I think is going to be very good for the
animals. It’s in the formative stage so I don’t know whether I can say
too much about it.

Shapiro: These folks in the mid-70s at the CEASE XE "Citizens to End
Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" meetings, some of them were
also in NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" and some
of them weren’t XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community"
\\r "arm3" ?

Stathos: Yes. They came from everywhere and I could see for the first
time that young people were enthusiastic to do something for the animal
movement. Some of us were the older disgruntled people in NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" who came. Others were very
young. You could tell they didn’t have much money. Some of them were in
college and some of them had to work all day and would come to CEASE
meetings at night. But they had been influenced by this new activist
thing. CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation
(CEASE)" had been formed because I think an organization had come to
Boston the year before to show them how to form. There was all this
activism to get grassroots formed and to show people how to do it.

Shapiro: CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation
(CEASE)" was a local Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" group? It didn’t
have national or regional scope?

Stathos: No. We used to meet in people’s living rooms. We met often at
Sylvia Vitale XE "Vitale, Sylvia" ’s apartment. Silvia was also a
splendid dedicated person. She was a great worker like Lorraine XE
"Roth, Lorraine" Roth.

Shapiro: What about Evelyn Kimber XE "Kimber, Evelyn" in the mid-70s?

Stathos: I have no idea when she came to CEASE, but I do remember she
said, “I’d like to introduce the animal rights issues to my church.”
After that, of course, she just took off and she became a much respected
person in the movement. She was an excellent speaker and writer.
Whenever there was a rally or a fur XE "fur" -free Friday demonstration
in November, Evelyn was always there. So we’d always meet because we
were the group that became activists in Boston.

Shapiro: Was the focus of CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and
Exploitation (CEASE)" still anti-vivisection or was it everything?

Stathos: CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation
(CEASE)" in the beginning was expressly formed to concentrate on
vivisection. CEASE members felt that was the most horrible thing that
was happening to animals. Later on they took on other issues, and then
they did a lot with the fur XE "fur" issue. I think right now — well, I
can’t remember, but I know that vivisection doesn’t play such a
prominent role now, but it did in the beginning.

Shapiro: And CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation
(CEASE)" ’s view of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" role was? You’ve sort of intimated, but what was CEASE’s view
of NEAVS?

Stathos: They thought NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" was a do-nothing society and, of course, we did too and that’s
why we were at CEASE XE "Citizens to End Animal Suffering and
Exploitation (CEASE)" to see what we could do. We were so disgruntled
with NEAVS in general because they didn’t do anything against
vivisection.

We decided in the late 1970s to picket XE "demonstrations and protests"
the annual meetings which were held at the Copley Plaza Hotel in Boston
XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . Dorothy XE "O’Brien, Dorothy" O’Brien, as I
mentioned to you, was such an effective lobbyist for animals at this
time. She was in charge of it all. The group included Lorraine XE "Roth,
Lorraine" Roth, Annette XE "Pickett, Annette" Pickett, myself, and
Esther Nowell XE "Nowell, Esther" , who was a longtime member of NEAVS
XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . We walked up XE
"Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" and down in
front of this posh Copley Plaza Hotel with our signs as we were very
dissatisfied with NEAVS. I know the doorman looked at us with curiosity
XE "demonstrations and protests" .

Somehow we managed to get in to the hotel to sit down for the meeting,
which was held in the lower level of the Copley Plaza Hotel. Of course,
the board of directors looked with disdain at us. They thought we were
just a bunch of rowdies, I suppose. But we observed that a couple of
directors were wearing fur coats down to their ankles, and then we
noticed that they were serving ham sandwiches, so we didn’t think much
of them either. So it was not a friendly meeting at all for either
group.

Shapiro: For you personally, you had spent a lot of time reading about
NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" and being
involved in NEAVS, and now you’re confronting them. You’re going after
them. Tell us about your feelings about NEAVS. Was it difficult for you
to do this?

Stathos: I think I was swept along with the momentum of the protest XE
"demonstrations and protests" . Dorothy XE "O’Brien, Dorothy"
\[O’Brien\] arranged it. I can’t say that I would have said, “Well, I’m
going to protest.” But Dorothy was a very committed lady, and she also
had some fine tactics. She was distressed with NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . Everyone was distressed with NEAVS.
We wanted NEAVS to be doing something for the lab animals, and we saw
them as a do-nothing society at that time. As I say, I would not have
initiated it, but I certainly did go along with the people whom I really
looked up to at that time. So I didn’t have any feeling — I could not
have done this in front of George Farnum XE "Farnum, George" . I would
have sat down to talk to him about these things, but I had no such
reservations when it came to John O’Neil XE "O’Neil, John" , no such
reservation.

Shapiro: Do you want to take a break at this point, or we’re almost done
with this tape. Let’s stop.

\[End Tape 1, Side B; Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Shapiro: You had been talking about the confrontation. Where do you want
to go from there? This is around 1980 now XE "managing an organization"
\\r "org2" .

Stathos: That’s right. After President O’Neil XE "O’Neil, John" ’s death
\[there were\] some radical changes. That was 1981. Some really radical
changes took place. Judge \[Robert\] Ford XE "Ford, Robert" became the
interim president and then he became president. But at this time there
was a big battle for the presidency in ’82. Again, a large group of us
activists, a lot of the ones whom I’ve mentioned to you, we all met at
the Copley Plaza at the society XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" ’s annual meeting. There were many people from PETA XE "People
for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)" and CEASE XE "Citizens to
End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" there — PETA, of course,
meaning the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, and that was a
new group that had been formed in 1980. They were great young activists
and they were there to try and get some positions at NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" .

They did put up a slate of officers and board members. I remember at the
time I picked up Margaret Tuttle XE "Tuttle, Margaret" in my car. She
had written the book The Crimson Cage XE "Crimson Cage, The \[book\]"
and she had just moved to Concord XE "Massachusetts:Concord" . I said,
“Margaret, we need you. Come on!” She was a petite and aristocratic lady
and must have been about seventy-three then. Her novel, The Crimson Cage
(which was fabulous), related what so often happened to kidnapped
animals and how they many times wound up in laboratories. So Margaret
was a good sport. She came in to the meeting and she was part of the
protest to oust Ford, and I never forgot what a good sport she was to do
this with us.

Anyhow, we were just demanding that NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" do more than publish a magazine, which
many called an embarrassment, and to do more than just write letters to
legislators.

Shapiro: What was embarrassing about the magazine?

Stathos: Well, you haven’t seen it? It had pictures of puppy dogs with
satin ribbons around their necks and cute kittens and Christmas stories
about if not “Fido” some other puppy or a dog. It had absolutely nothing
to do with vivisection. There were just sweet pictures that you might
find in a publication by a humane society. We were really outraged that
the magazine should represent a vivisection society that was started by
radicals, let’s face it, that it had come to this.

Shapiro: Tell me about Ford XE "Ford, Robert" . What did you know about
him? What was your impression of him?

Stathos: There has been criticism about Robert Ford, Judge Ford XE
"Ford, Robert" . He was the vice president before he became the
president. He might not have gone in the direction he did, which was to
do a lot of really good things as president, had he not felt the
pressure of the activists. He felt this heat, and he really began to
initiate change at NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" . Several activists were added to the NEAVS board when three or
four resigned, and one of those activists was Sandi Larson XE "Larson,
Sandra" , who figured prominently in NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" ’ later history because she became the
scientific advisor at NEAVS and did so many wonderful things.

But Ford XE "Ford, Robert" , because he felt the pressure of the
activists, initiated — well, NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" initiated a campaign XE "campaigning and lobbying"
called Protect Our Pets XE "Protect Our Pets" . With the help of
thousands of activists, NEAVS spearheaded a successful initiative
petition campaign to repeal the 1957 Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts"
law XE "law and legislation" , the pound seizure XE "animal pounds:pound
seizure” bill in Massachusetts which had been passed in 1957. The
campaign was very successful and it was a huge victory. It really should
have taught us — I think it did — that when groups work together they
can be very successful. Towards the end the MSPCA XE "Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)"
\[Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals\] came
in to work with NEAVS on that campaign. We volunteers would go to
supermarkets, landfills, fairs, anywhere to get signatures for the
petition. I believe the state on this particular petition received more
signatures than any other petition that had ever come in to the state.
It was hugely successful.

But this is the big thing that I think Ford XE "Ford, Robert" did. For
the first time in NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" ’ history it funded XE "funding/finance" a project at Tufts XE
"Tufts University" \[University\] to find an alternative XE "animal
experimentation and testing:alternatives" to the painful and outdated
Draize Test. Remember, the idea of finding alternatives was so new, but
it was the most promising way to go, as I look back, to find these
alternatives. I think at that time he was very, very proud — I think he
said it was the first grant ever to be given to a school to find an
alternative. But at any rate, it was certainly an innovative move on his
part.

Then money was given to the newly-formed American Fund for Alternatives
to Animals in Research XE "American Fund for Alternatives to Animals in
Research (AFAAR)" , called AFAAR. That organization was founded by Ethel
Thurston XE "Thurston, Ethel" , who was also a pioneer in this whole new
field of alternatives XE "funding/finance" , a woman whom I admired so
much, as I do Christine Stevens XE "Stevens, Christine" , because she is
a great lady and also a very distinguished musician XE "animal
experimentation and testing:alternatives" .

Shapiro: Did you meet her?

Stathos: Absolutely. I had the pleasure of having her company at my home
in Lincoln XE "Massachusetts:Lincoln" .

Shapiro: What was she like?

Stathos: She was just a marvelous woman. She too was a woman who was
very quiet about her accomplishments, a very gracious woman in every
respect and yet, you know, steely underneath. I couldn’t help but be
impressed with her stories. She had known for such a long time that she
wanted to do something for the animals, but the Catholic Church, of
course, was a great impediment to this because it always said animals
didn’t have souls and that people shouldn’t waste their time worrying
about the animals. But she did.

Shapiro: She was Catholic?

Stathos: Yes, she was. It showed how determined she was to do something,
and I think there are a lot of inspiring stories along the way that I
could tell XE "Thurston, Ethel" about her. So this meeting was very
memorable for me.

The other thing that was impressive is that she was such a splendid
musician XE "music/musicians" and that she had been — she had had many
teaching positions at colleges. From the 1960s to the 1980s she was the
chairman of the history department at the Manhattan School of Music XE
"Manhattan School of Music" in New York XE "New York:New York City" . It
seemed to me — I don’t want to go too much into this, but it was an area
of earlier music in which she specialized, chiefly Medieval music and
history. She was also a doctor of music, so high up in the arts world
and yet such an effective person with a vision for animals XE "Thurston,
Ethel" .

Shapiro: You’ve mentioned several people, including yourself of course,
who were very much interested in music professionally and otherwise and
interested in the animal issue. Is there any way that you understand
that connection?

Stathos: No, but I think of it once in a while.

Shapiro: What’s your thought about it? Why are people who are interested
in music XE "music/musicians" also sensitive to the plight of animals?

Stathos: I think you have to broaden that a little bit when you think
that people like John Ruskin XE "Ruskin, John" was an ardent
anti-vivisectionist at Oxford XE "Oxford University" \[University\].

Shapiro: Ruskin was what XE "psychological aspects" \\r "psych2" ? A
critic XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "psych2" ?

Stathos: John Ruskin was a writer, professor of art, great art critic,
and historian. There were also the authors Victor Hugo XE "Hugo, Victor"
and John Galsworthy XE "Galsworthy, John" . And there was a close friend
of XE "Emerson, Ralph Waldo" Emerson’s, Thomas Carlisle XE "Carlisle,
Thomas" , who was very much against vivisection. There are so many
people in the arts who are sympathetic to animals that I wouldn’t limit
the list to musicians.

I think there is a sensitivity that people connected with the arts have
in their nature. They are basically intuitive persons, although artists
must, of course, learn their craft, which takes a lot of hard (left
brain) discipline and work. Their outlook on life and issues, however,
comes far more from being intuitive than from being scientifically
oriented.

Shapiro: Okay. Sensitivity and also you’re saying that they’re
intuitive, that is, that they just have an immediate feeling that
something is beautiful or that something is right or wrong and they are
compelled by that so that they can become committed to animal issues.

Stathos: Maybe. I haven’t thought a lot about it. But I do know that
John Ruskin XE "Ruskin, John" resigned from Oxford when vivisection came
to the college where he was teaching and he simply resigned because he’d
have none of it. The details I don’t want to get into because they are
too involved.

Shapiro: I’m just summarizing what you seem to be saying, which is that
these people were not science people, they weren’t analytic, they were
intuitive.

Stathos: I think so for the most part.

Shapiro: And that allowed them to hold onto the issue that vivisection
simply was wrong on its face.

Stathos: I think so.

Shapiro: We’re running down in time XE "managing an organization" \\r
"org3" . Do you want to move to the Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland"
Amory era or more about Ford XE "Ford, Robert" ?

Stathos: Well, I think this is another big thing that happened under
Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" , which absolutely brought NEAVS into the
modern period. Just look at the NEAVS publication at that time,
Reverence for Life XE "Reverence for Life \[NEAVS magazine\]" . Suddenly
it became an activist magazine. You could pick it up and you can find
item after item about the Revlon XE "Revlon" campaign and Revlon’s
rabbit blinding. There were big ads in magazines like Time XE "Time
\[magazine\]" magazine with pictures of blinded rabbits. There were
subway ads. It was an activist magazine, and you could read about Henry
Spira XE "Spira, Henry" in it and his picket at the Museum of Natural
History XE "Museum of Natural History (New York)" in New York — all of
this.

Shapiro: And you credit Ford XE "Ford, Robert" with this?

Stathos: I credit him with doing many good things, but if the heat of
the activists hadn’t been right there close to him, who knows how much
would have been done. To his credit, however, he did them.

Shapiro: But he was reacting possibly to the pressure.

Stathos: But he did things. He knew a lot of people and he got a lot of
things done. Whether he was pushed or did the pushing, the whole
organization was pushed into the modern era of animal rights, thank
goodness.

Shapiro: You want to talk about the shift from Ford XE "Ford, Robert" to
Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory?

Stathos: It was another battle. I can maybe very briefly \[talk about
it\]. Again, after Judge Ford XE "Ford, Robert" ’s presidency there was
this huge concerted effort to put new people in power at NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" . In 1987 Cleveland XE "Amory,
Cleveland" Amory became president of the society. All of us were elated.
He had been an honorary vice president of NEAVS. He had also served on
the board.

But at the same time, this new board that we voted for was made up
mostly of PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)"
members and other activists, some of whom came from CEASE XE "Citizens
to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE)" . It was called at the
time “the PETA takeover” because there were so many people from the PETA
crowd on the board and they were not people from New England, which
displeased a lot of people. We thought we were doing the right thing
because the PETA group had all proven themselves so wonderful in doing
great things for the animals.

Shapiro: So you supported the PETA XE "People for the Ethical Treatment
of Animals (PETA)" folks.

Stathos: Absolutely. We were elated. At that time Gul Agha XE "Agha,
Gul" did stand up and he said, “How can you let your organization go
into the hands of people that aren’t even New Englanders?” I can see him
standing now and trying to appeal to people, but we would hear none of
it. We were just elated that we had put in all of these activists. So
that was that. I remember that we were totally elated that we had
Cleveland XE "Amory, Cleveland" Amory as our president.

Shapiro: You want to talk about the history you did or do you want to
talk about your impressions of the movement in these last few moments?

Stathos: I think it would be nice to talk a little bit about the
history. I really would love to.

In 1990 I got a call XE "education" \\r "educ2" , asking if I would like
to fill in for three months at NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection
Society (NEAVS)" in their education department. Of course, the words
just jumped out at me — education. I thought, “Oh, my goodness, this was
my old dream in the 1960s coming true.” I didn’t know what I’d do in
education in an age of “activism,” but I just said yes. So those three
months lasted for five years. At first I had to make a lot of telephone
calls to teachers at various schools and remind them that NEAVS XE "New
England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" was prepared to present free
talks at their schools on the environment and animal issues. Then I
remember that to keep my job I had to learn computer skills in a hurry,
and that was the hardest part of my job. \[Laughter\].

Then I had a lot of really good assignments and I created a library
project which took a lot of writing. It eventually brought all these
animal rights issues to about a half a million library patrons in
Massachusetts XE "Massachusetts" in the 1990s. Then I wrote a lot for
the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" magazine,
called the Quarterly XE "Quarterly \[NEAVS magazine\]" at that time, and
in time became what they called the director of special projects and
then the co-chair for the NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" centennial. I had a lot to do with what I thought was education
because I had to write so much material all the time for students and
librarians and then for NEAVS’ centennial.

Then during this time I read a lot of old NEAVS XE "New England
Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" magazines that were tucked away on the
shelf in the library. They were so fascinating, these early magazines,
and the founders were so courageous I just volunteered to write a
hundred-year history of NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" for its centennial in 1995. So that’s what I did. That was the
highlight really of my stay at NEAVS, I think, writing the history.

Shapiro: Do you want to tell us some about the early primary figures in
that history?

Stathos: If you’d like to hear. Do you think it would be interesting?

Shapiro: Sure. Why don’t you select in terms of the themes that you’ve
been talking about — how NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society
(NEAVS)" was education-based and AV-based and how these folks formed it
that way.

Stathos: You get to realize the founders were the radicals of their day
XE "animal experimentation and testing" \\r "exper6" . It’s hard to
believe, but they were rather wild radicals like the young people in the
1970s and 1980s who were forming these new animal rights groups. The
founders had courage in getting together for this cause because they
were the cream of the crop in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston" . Well, I
wouldn’t say all of them were blue-bloods, but they were the people with
social standing and with standing in the women’s suffrage movement or
the civil liberties union, which one of the early vice presidents was a
member of.

What XE "medicine/medical community" \\r "med3" brought them together
was something that started at Harvard XE "Harvard University" . In 1871
Professor Henry Bowditch XE "Bowditch, Henry" established one of the
first vivisection laboratories in the county at Harvard Medical School
XE "Harvard Medical School" . He had studied physiology in Germany XE
"Germany" where animals were commonly used in experiments. This was
maybe 1850 or 1860, because vivisection was going strong in the middle
1800s in Europe when there was no conception of it here in America at
that time. Up until that time I’ve read that medical doctors used
comparative anatomy or — what was the other thing? — clinical studies to
study physiology. They never used animals. These methods were enough for
them.

So when this Dr. Bowditch XE "Bowditch, Henry" wanted to bring Harvard
up to date with Europe and European methods by using animals, Dr. Henry
Bigelow XE "Bigelow, Henry" , who was the famed surgeon at the Harvard
Medical School XE "Harvard Medical School" , was simply horrified. He
had a big name. He was a very big name at Harvard.

So he went to Edward Clement XE "Clement, Edward" , who was the editor
of the Boston Evening Transcript XE "Boston Evening Transcript" which
was the leading newspaper XE "media" in Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston"
. According to five wonderful accounts in old magazines he closed the
door to Clement’s office and then asked, “Do you know what they’re doing
at Harvard Medical School?” Mr. Clement did not, so Dr. Bigelow XE
"Bigelow, Henry" told him about the new so-called scientific medicine
which used live animals in experiments. It didn’t take long for Clement
XE "Clement, Edward" to be convinced that he had to do something too.
Soon these forceful anti-vivisection editorials appeared in the
Transcript. Before long people read these articles that so described the
horrors of vivisection and they began to think an association really
should be formed to prevent the spreading of this horrible thing, this
new practice.

So NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" was
incorporated in 1895, and a lawyer named Philip Peabody XE "Peabody,
Philip" became its first president. The founders were all the radicals
of their day, as I have said. Earlier Philip Peabody had gone to Europe
to observe vivisection practices. When he came back he wrote a book
about the horrors of vivisection and presented it to the Boston Public
Library XE "Boston Public Library" in the late 1800s. The library still
has this copy there, which I have read.

Shapiro: So Bigelow XE "Bigelow, Henry" , where was he coming from? He
was just a person who did more clinical-based research?

Stathos: He was a great surgeon at the Massachusetts General Hospital.
He was a beloved, world famous surgeon. There is a beautiful portrait of
him at the Countway Library of the Harvard Medical School XE "Harvard
Medical School" . It is a floor-to-ceiling portrait of Dr. Henry Bigelow
XE "Bigelow, Henry" . He was revered. He was just the top man in his
profession at that time.

Shapiro: What do you think his objection to vivisection was?

Stathos: Oh, he said in no uncertain terms that this was immoral to
begin with XE "ethics and morality" . He said it was a great crime
against the animals. He felt too that this was not the way science
should go because vivisection was such an inhumane thing to do to
animals. He said, “We will look back upon vivisection as we look back
upon the burning of witches in the name of religion.” Pretty strong
stuff. But he had no effect on this tide of vivisection which was
coming. It was a tidal wave.

Shapiro: So that’s the beginning. And Peabody XE "Peabody, Philip" was
an attorney and a fairly prominent Boston XE "Massachusetts:Boston"
person.

Stathos: He was a very prominent person. His father had been one of the
state supreme court judges. The name Peabody XE "Peabody, Philip" is
just one of the real Boston Brahmin names. Peabody was trained as a
doctor but he never apparently practiced medicine, and then he became a
lawyer.

As I have mentioned, Peabody had firsthand knowledge also of what was
going on in the labs in Europe because he went there with a Dr.
Ingersoll XE "Ingersoll, \_\_\_\_\_\_" in the early 1890s. Together they
witnessed what was going on in Europe and after returning wrote about
their experiences as two vivisectionists after observing vivisection in
various countries.

Of course, there was no anesthesia then. There was nothing to ease the
pain of the animal. There was this idea that animals couldn’t feel pain,
that they weren’t worthy of consideration. This had come out of the
early period of vivisection which claimed that animals are like clocks.
They just howl when vivisected but they’re not conscious of the pain
that they’re suffering. You know, Peabody saw things — horses in France
XE "France" that were vivisected again and again and again — really
horrible things. He \[Peabody\] came back determined to write his book
and seemed like the perfect candidate to be the president when this
anti-vivisection group wanted to band together in Boston.

He was approached by a young man \[Joseph Greene XE "Greene, Joseph" \]
who had, as I remember it, won an essay contest that \[George\] Angell
XE "Angell, George" had established with the theme, “Why I am for or
against vivisection.” This young man wrote an anti-vivisection essay and
he won the two hundred dollars that George Angell offered for the essay.
Then this young man decided that something should be done about putting
a group together. He approached Philip Peabody XE "Peabody, Philip" who
said, “Yes, I will be the president,” and then they began to gather
people to serve on the board. It’s in the written history of NEAVS.

Shapiro: Good. We’re going to wind up in a couple more minutes. Anything
else you want to —

Stathos: I guess just this thought, that when the anti-vivisection
society began, it didn’t have very many figures about how many animals
were used in experiments XE "laboratory animals" . In 1882 there were
forty-two vivisectors asking for licenses in England XE "England" \\t
"See Great Britain" XE “Great Britain” . By 1913 638 vivisectors were
asking for licenses, which means that thousands of animals were probably
being used in experiments by the end of the century. We can only guess
that the same number were probably being used here, maybe a few thousand
— who knows? — maybe ten thousand. But the number was in the thousands.
Now we estimate that at the end of the twentieth century between twenty-
to sixty-million-plus animals are used every year in experiments.

Shapiro: In the U.S.

Stathos: Yes, in the U.S. alone, and that billions — ten or fifteen
billion dollars goes into biomedical research funded by our federal
government. Of course, much of that money is used for animal experiments
XE "laboratory animals" .

Shapiro: What is your feeling as you look at that? Is that discouraging
XE "animal rights movement/animal protection community" \\r "arm4" ?

Stathos: I think there has been, of course, a huge change in the whole
movement. This is perhaps encouraging because until the 1970s this whole
issue of vivisection was a moral issue to the anti-vivisectionists. Now
we fund the search for alternatives to animals in experiments. This is
helping NEAVS XE "New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS)" and the
anti-vivisectionists challenge this ultimate myth of the biomedical
establishment that without animal experiments we’d all be dead.

And in the 1990s we had the help from scientists and physicians and
researchers themselves who joined us. Well, look at your group, PsyETA,
the Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of Animals XE "Psychologists
for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PsyETA)" , and the Medical
Research Modernization Committee XE "Medical Research Modernization
Committee" , and so forth. You have people in your profession who now
are speaking out against vivisection, claiming that it’s bad science. I
think this is a huge gain, because I think if we didn’t win with the
moral argument, science can help find a better way to do experiments
without animals. So far so good, but there is also one big problem that
remains, I think.

Shapiro: Which is?

Stathos: I think the biggest challenge still is that animals are
considered things. Even though we are able to get rid of every animal in
the laboratories, the idea that they can be genetically XE "genetic
engineering" engineered is equally horrific, and this happens because
society considers animals “things.”

When I learn that Steven Wise XE "Wise, Steven" is giving a course in
animal law XE "law and legislation" at Harvard University XE "Harvard
University" , I observe that our old nemesis \[Harvard\] is leading the
way in this matter by appointing Steve to give this animal law course at
the Law School. Steve and people like him say the time has come to
challenge the notion that animals are “things,” for the core reason
animals suffer in our society is because they do not have legal standing
in the courts. I can only repeat that until animals have legal standing
and are not considered “things,” we cannot help them to the extent that
we must. Science might find better ways of doing research, but what are
we going to do about the animals that are subjected to transgenic
research XE "genetic engineering" ? Until we have a handle on that I
think we don’t have really a handle on what happens to animals. I think
that’s our greatest challenge.

Shapiro: Thank you, Peggy.

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

INDEX \\h " " \\c "1" \\e " "

Agha, Gul 26, 32

American Fund for Alternatives to Animals in Research (AFAAR) 29

American Medical Association (AMA) 15

Amory, Cleveland 20–24, 31, 32

Angell, George 35

animal experimentation and testing 4, 8–9, 13–14, 16–18, 30–31, 33–36

alternatives 22–23, 29

animal pounds

pound seizure 14–15, 29

Animal Rescue League 5, 8

animal rights movement/animal protection community 3, 19, 20, 23, 25,
26–27, 35–36

animal shelters 13

Animal Welfare Institute 3, 7

Aus Meinen Leben und Denken \[book\] 9, 10

Bigelow, Henry 33, 34

Boston Evening Transcript 33

Boston Globe 5, 17, 24

Boston Public Library 34

Boston University 2, 4

Bowditch, Henry 33

Brack, \_\_\_\_\_\_ 10

Brahms, Johannes 11

Buttrick, Carlton 8

California 25

Berkeley 25

campaigning and lobbying 29

Cannon, Walter 18

Carlisle, Thomas 30

Carson, Rachel 21, 22

cats 3–5

Christian Science Monitor 13

civil rights 18

Clement, Edward 8, 33, 34

Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation (CEASE) 25–28, 32

Crimson Cage, The \[book\] 28

custom/tradition/culture 10

de La Valette, Mary 26

demonstrations and protests 18, 23, 27, 28

Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst 8

Earth Day 21, 22

education 10, 23, 32–33

Eisenhower, Dwight D. 13

Emerson, Ralph Waldo 21, 30

Endangered Species Act 21

England See Great Britain

environmentalism 21–22

ethics and morality 9, 10, 15, 34

factory farms 5, 12

Farnum, George 6, 9, 14–17, 19, 20, 22, 23, 28

feminism 18

Ford, Robert 28, 29, 31, 32

France 35

Nice 11

Fund for Animals 20, 23

funding/finance 19–20, 29

fur 5, 10, 12, 23, 25, 27

Gabon

Lambaréné 10

Galsworthy, John 30

Garrison, William Lloyd 4

Geiringer, Karl 2

genetic engineering 36

Germany 8, 12, 13, 33

Berlin 8, 9

Munich 8, 12, 13, 15

Girl Scouts 2

Great Britain 35

London 11

Greene, Joseph 35

Hall, Elsie 11, 12

Hall, Oscar 11

Harvard Medical School 18, 33, 34

Harvard University 15, 33, 36

Hearst, William Randolph 14

Hoover, Herbert 15

horses 1, 2

Hugo, Victor 30

Humane Slaughter Act 7

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 3

Hume, Charles 7

Ingersoll, \_\_\_\_\_\_ 34

International Association Against Painful Experiments in Animals 22

Johnson, Lyndon B. 14

Kimber, Evelyn 26, 27

Laboratory Animal Welfare Act 14

laboratory animals 14–15, 35

Larson, Sandra 26, 29

law and legislation 11, 14–15, 29, 36

Living Tissue \[NEAVS magazine\] 8, 9, 11, 16

managing an organization 25–26, 28–29, 31–32

Manhattan School of Music 30

Marine Mammal Protection Act 21

Massachusetts 29, 32

Boston 3, 4, 6, 12–16, 18, 23–25, 27, 33, 34

Brookline 26

Concord 21, 28

Lincoln 23–25, 30

Salem 1, 2

Massachusetts General Hospital 16

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 26

Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (MSPCA)
29

media 13–14, 17, 33

Medical Research Modernization Committee 35

medicine/medical community 18, 33–34

alternative medicine/preventive medicine 15, 18

Melrose (Mass.) Humane Society 15

Memoirs of Childhood \[book\] 10

Mexico 2

Mobilization for Animals 25

Monte Carlo 11

Museum of Natural History (New York) 31

music/musicians 2–3, 4–5, 8, 11, 12, 30

National Institutes of Health (NIH) 18

New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS) 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14–20,
22–29, 32–35

New England Conservatory of Music 2

New York

Long Island 18

New York City 7, 24, 30

New York Times 14

Nowell, Esther 27

O’Brien, Dorothy 24, 25, 27, 28

O’Neil, John 22, 23, 28

Oxford University 30

Peabody, Philip 34, 35

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 28, 32

Pickett, Annette 23–27

Protect Our Pets 29

psychological aspects 5–6, 30–31

Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PsyETA) 35

public relations/outreach 16–17

Quarterly \[NEAVS magazine\] 32

Regan, Tom 15

religion 25

Christianity 15

Reverence for Life \[NEAVS magazine\] 31

Revlon 31

Roth, Lorraine 25, 27

Ruskin, John 30, 31

Schumann, Clara 11

Schweitzer, Albert 6, 9, 10, 15, 17

Serkin, Rudolf 9

Shaw, George Bernard 11, 12, 26

Silent Spring \[book\] 21

Singer, Peter 15

Society for Animal Protective Legislation (SAPL) 3, 14

South Africa

Cape Town 11

Spira, Henry 17, 23, 31

Stevens, Christine 3, 7, 8, 11, 14, 29

Stevens, Roger 7

Strickland, Joseph 16, 17

Susie \[cat\] 3–5, 7, 18

Switzerland 9, 22

Thoreau, Henry David 21

Thurston, Ethel 29, 30

Time \[magazine\] 7, 31

Tufts University 29

Tuttle, Margaret 28

vegetarianism 5, 12, 24

Vietnam War 13, 18

Vitale, Sylvia 27

Washington, DC 7

Wentzel, Earl 8

Wise, Steven 36

Wordsworth, William 21

World War II 8, 13, 17, 18
