---
---

This edited transcript is the product of a tape-recorded interview
conducted by Kenneth Shapiro with Ethel Thurston in New York, New York,
on May 10 and May 11, 2001 for Recording Animal Advocacy.

TAPES AND INTERVIEW RECORDS

The original tape recordings of the interview, edited transcript, and
records pertaining to the interview are deposited permanently at
Columbia University’s Oral History Research Office.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Interview history . . . . . i

Biographical sketch . . . . . ii

Session 1 - May 10, 2001

\[Tape 1, Side A\] . . . . .

Parents’ and ET’s relationship with “Dave” \[companion dog\] – Given
“Teazle” \[companion dog\] at age 9; attending boarding school, but not
happy there; not considered obedient by parents; Christian Scientists’
views of animals – Majored in psychology at Vassar College; especially
interested in ethics – Very interested in teaching children – Studying
under and assisting the famous music teacher Nadia Boulanger in France –
Teaching medieval music at Manhattanville College during the first half
of the 1940s; became a Christian in 1943; critical of the Catholic views
of animals – Never very close to parents – Teaching part-time in New
York, and receiving Ph.D. in music in 1954.

\[Tape 1, Side B\] . . . . .

Teaching at Hunter College; transcribing medieval religious plays –
Meeting Helen Jones in 1956 – Learning about and becoming interested in
alternatives to animal research in the 1950s through Elinor Seiling;
approach of Seiling and some advocates of alternatives did not seem to
be practical – Meeting and communicating frequently with Colin Smith of
the UK’s National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS) – Meeting Lady Dowding
in the 1960s; becoming a vegetarian around 1970; helping to arrange a
lecture tour for Lady Dowding – Writing and disseminating leaflets for
NAVS and others; ET’s public and private positions on not using animals
in research; speculation on situation now if there had been a nationwide
effort to replace animals in the 1960s – Started American Fund for
Alternatives to Animal Research (AFAAR) in 1973 at NAVS’ request;
realizing the need to work with scientists with the help of John
Petricciani.

\[Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

AFAAR’s structure and its major projects: distributing leaflets and
giving grants to scientists to develop alternatives to animal research.

Session 2 - May 11, 2001

\[Continue Tape 2, Side A\] . . . . .

AFAAR’s first science advisor, John Petricciani – An early grantee,
Roland Nardone; his courses on cell culture techniques – ET’s
assistants; some animal rights advocates do not have enough
understanding of science and scientists – Views on PeTA (People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals) and the three U.S. anti-vivisection
societies – Protests are of some use, but one needs to develop
alternatives – More on AFAAR’s grantees – Björn Ekwall was AFAAR’s best
advisor – Starting and funding Beauty Without Cruelty in the U.S. – The
fur issue.

\[Tape 2, Side B\] . . . . .

More on childhood experiences of animals: horrified at treatment of
animals on a farm and in the university, but could not discuss that with
parents; feeling guilty about “Dave” being run over by a car; could not
make friends with “Tony”; very protective of “Teazle” – Views of various
animal protection advocates and organizations.

Index . . . . .

INTERVIEW HISTORY

Interview Time and Place:

May 10, 2001

New York, New York – Home of Ethel Thurston

Session of 1-1/2 hour

May 11, 2001

New York, New York – Home of Ethel Thurston

Session of 1-1/4 hour

Interviewer:

Kenneth Shapiro (Vice President, Recording Animal Advocacy, co-founder
and executive director, Psychologists for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals)

Transcriber:

Douglas J. Wilson (professional transcriber)

Project Manager and Editor :

Carmen Lee (President, Recording Animal Advocacy)

Editing:

The draft transcript was edited by Thurston. Lee prepared the
introductory material and index, except for the biographical sketch
which was written by Thurston.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Ethel Thurston was born in Minnesota in 1911. Her father was professor
of law at the University of Minnesota, later at Yale, then Harvard. She
graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Vassar College in 1933 with majors in
music and psychology. She continued studies in music with Nadia
Boulanger in Paris (1938), and became Mlle Boulanger’s teaching
assistant. These plans were interrupted by the Nazi invasion and
occupation of France (1940).

She escaped Hitler’s invading army on a bicycle and assisted Mlle
Boulanger to travel across Spain to Lisbon (Portugal), where Thurston’s
father had managed to secure passage for both to New York. Mlle
Boulanger’s fifteen pieces of luggage included historical documents
which had to leave France (under Nazi Occupation) urgently, quietly, and
secretly. Thurston took all fifteen pieces, sometimes traveling
separately, to New York.

Since then, Thurston has taught harmony, counterpoint, music history,
and research methods at Manhattan College of Music, and some of these at
Hunter College, St. John’s University, Bryn Mawr, and other colleges.
She earned her Ph.D. in music from New York University in 1954 and
retired from teaching in 1973.

Since 1973 her energies have been volunteered as head of the national
animal protection societies she founded: Beauty Without Cruelty USA, and
the American Fund for Alternatives to Animal Research. The first
provides information where to purchase personal and household products
made and tested without harm to animals; the second provides financial
grants to develop non-animal testing systems.

\*\*\*\*\*\*

Thurston elaborated on her assistance of Boulanger in a phone
conversation with Kenneth Shapiro after the interview:

Boulanger was a well known teacher of composition in the 1930s and
1940s. She taught at Fontainebleau during the year and the summer. And I
met her there and wanted to continue with her during the winter. In
those days, students became very friendly with their teachers - this was
quite normal. Also, teachers used students to help them in their
careers. She asked me to help her - to buy tickets for her to and from
America and to run errands for her.

At that time I had bicycled to Bordeaux to join an ambulance unit. But
France capitulated. I went back to a town in France that she was staying
at. I stayed with her until she decided to leave France. We both moved
to Vichy. We then traveled separately so that her leaving would be less
noticed. We met up in Barcelona, then went together to Lisbon where my
father was. He arranged a trip for her to New York. I didn't really like
to do these things for her but it was expected. She expressed no
gratitude.

Ethel Thurston

Session \#1

May 10, 2001

New York, New York

Kenneth Shapiro, Interviewer

\[Begin Tape 1, Side A\]

Shapiro: Ethel, I want to thank you for helping us out. Let’s begin with
your childhood and where you were born, when, and something about your
parents perhaps.

Thurston: I was born in October 1911, in Minneapolis, Minnesota. My
father was a professor of law at the University of Minnesota Law School.
I have quite a few recollections. We left Minnesota when I was five
years old. We had a dog, Dave. Other friends either had or didn’t have
animals as part of the household but didn’t love them the way we did
Dave, or thought we did.

Shapiro: And your mother? What did your mother do?

Thurston: Cared for Dave and administered the household. I think at that
point, age five, with regard to animals, I was no different from any
other five-year-old. I wanted to hold the leash when the dog was out
walking and to dominate him the way I saw the grownup people do and was
told that wouldn’t be proper. Someone might trip on Dave’s leash;
besides, Dave was older than I was and was grownup, whereas I was not.

Shapiro: So your family first got a dog when you were how old?

Thurston: I was less than five years old.

Shapiro: What do you remember was your mother and father’s view of the
dog? How did they treat the dog?

Thurston: They professed and insisted that he be treated well. Though
later on when I was more mature, my standards differed from theirs. But
in those particular times he was to be treated well. His feelings were
not to be hurt. He was not to be physically hurt. Once—I don’t know how
small I was, three or four—I experimented and kicked Dave in the ribs to
see what would happen. I did not want to hurt Dave but to find out what
the grownups really wanted. I was immediately grabbed by the nearest
grown person and given a spanking.

Shapiro: This was about Dave?

Thurston: This was Dave.

Shapiro: And you were three or four years old. You already had Dave at
three or four.

Thurston: Yes. I think Dave came before I did. He was part of the
household before I was. I think I resented this a little.

Shapiro: I see. Were there other animals in the household?

Thurston: No other animals.

Shapiro: Was the dog kept inside or outside or both?

Thurston: He was kept inside and slept on my parents’ bed.

Shapiro: Was he your special companion? Who was he attached to most do
you think?

Thurston: He was attached to the grown people.

Shapiro: Mother or father?

Thurston: Both.

Shapiro: Were there other children?

Thurston: No, I was an only child until almost age nine.

Shapiro: Then there was a brother or a sister?

Thurston: Then there was a brother.

Shapiro: Anything else you want to say about your mother and father’s
view of animals?

Thurston: They were very insistent that they be treated well. They
didn’t use the word “humane,” but they said he was not to be taken
advantage of or hurt, either physically or his feelings.

Shapiro: What about other kinds of animals like wild animals? Did you
know anything about their views of wild animals?

Thurston: They didn’t express views very much on that subject. My father
didn’t hunt, but he never said why he didn’t hunt.

Shapiro: So it wasn’t a topic of discussion generally.

Thurston: Rarely discussed.

Shapiro: What were some of your interests as a child?

Thurston: In childhood? I did become interested in animals. My friends
and I went for walks with a French governess hired by our families to
converse with us in French. The dogs went on the walks. We expected that
if there was an outing which was pleasurable and the dog liked it, that
he should not be left behind.

Shapiro: So Dave was included.

Thurston: He was included. It was easier to talk about Dave in French
than talk French about other subjects, so we steered the conversation
very often that way.

Shapiro: Did you give commands to Dave in French?

Thurston: “Viens ici.”

Shapiro: Oui, d’accord.

Thurston: “Come here.” The familiar form is used when addressing animals
or small children.

Shapiro: The familiar. Very good. I was asking what other interests
besides animals you had when you were five, ten years old.

Thurston: In the household we had no other animals.

Shapiro: Other interests of yours?

Thurston: Oh, interests. I don’t know. I was, I think, mainly interested
in playing with the children who lived on the block or near. I begged
Edith and Sarah, my best friends, to ask my parents to adopt them so I
could have sisters. Yes, I think more so than playing with the dog. At
that age I was not particularly interested in animals.

Shapiro: Okay, that’s important. You weren’t that interested. You had a
dog, but you weren’t that interested in animals at that time.

Thurston: No. I understood he was my parents’ dog, not my dog, and I was
a little bit jealous of the attention that my parents gave him.

Shapiro: Tell me about your adolescent years when you were a teenager.

Thurston: My brother was born, and I was given my own dog.

Shapiro: When you were almost nine.

Thurston: I was almost nine. Then as he grew to be a year-old, then a
two-year-old, like some others his age, he was cruel to the animal. I
defended her, and the conflict began. In fact, I was finally sent away
to boarding school because there was too much conflict over the animal.

Shapiro: At what age were you sent to boarding school.

Thurston: That was fifteen.

Shapiro: You were fifteen. Did you want to go to boarding school?

Thurston: No, I didn’t. I had a boyfriend in New Haven where we then
lived.

Shapiro: You had moved from Minnesota?

Thurston: Yes. My father had moved from the University of Minnesota to
Yale.

Shapiro: At what age did you move to Connecticut?

Thurston: That was almost nine.

Shapiro: When you were almost nine. At fourteen you had a boyfriend and
you had to leave the boyfriend to go to boarding school.

Thurston: I didn’t want to leave the boyfriend. I didn’t have any other
particular reason.

Shapiro: Where did you go to boarding school?

Thurston: I went to a small boarding school in Norwalk, Connecticut,
which had the reputation of a progressive school. I was worried that
they wouldn’t prepare me properly for college. So I found out the
necessary knowledge of Latin, French, English, and so forth that one was
supposed to have, and I went through this listing with the teachers of
these subjects to make sure I could somehow get into college.

Shapiro: Were your parents progressive then politically?

Thurston: No, but they thought I was a problem and might respond to
extraordinary treatment.

Shapiro: In what way did they think you were a problem?

Thurston: I was not obedient and had conflicts of values with them. My
mother was, to some extent, progressive. Before she married she had
taken the current kindergarten course as preparation for teaching.

Shapiro: How did your parents think you were a problem? In what way did
they think you were a problem?

Thurston: Because I wasn’t obedient. In those days, girls especially
were expected to be obedient.

Shapiro: So they sent you to a boarding school.

Thurston: I wasn’t obedient because I thought my young preschool brother
should be stopped from molesting the dog either by me or by our parents.

Shapiro: So the dog was an important issue in that.

Thurston: Yes. It was not so much so until it was a question of her
being hurt.

Shapiro: Okay. You did empathize with your dog. Were you eventually
happy at boarding school? How was that?

Thurston: At boarding school I was not very happy because I worried over
what might become of my dog.

Shapiro: What was that dog’s name?

Thurston: Teazle, named after a character in a Sheridan play (not by
me), “Lady Teazle.”

Shapiro: But that was your dog.

Thurston: That was my dog, but I wasn’t considered grownup enough to
name her.

Shapiro: Were you close to that dog?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: More so than to Dave, the first family dog?

Thurston: Very close to Teazle, especially as she was my own.

Shapiro: Was Teazle your best friend?

Thurston: I think so, yes.

Shapiro: But you did eventually have a boyfriend also.

Thurston: I did have a boyfriend who was very attached to my dog and
wanted one like her. His mother thought that a little too much and
wouldn’t allow it.

Shapiro: Was the school religious at all?

Thurston: Yes, but religion never came into relations with the animals.
When I went to boarding school, I missed Teazle and talked about her
frequently. At one point, my friends and the head of the school could
stand it no longer; they decided that the best cure for that was just
not to talk about Teazle or any animal at all. So I was told, and did
not speak of animals for most of two years, until I graduated.

Shapiro: How did you feel about that?

Thurston: I was furious but obeyed at school. I corresponded with
friends about animals.

Shapiro: I was wondering if your family was religious, if they had a
religion.

Thurston: My mother was a Christian Scientist. That wouldn’t very much
affect anything to do with animals.

Shapiro: What about your father’s religion?

Thurston: My father was not religious at all, and my mother was
Christian Scientist; there was no family religion.

Shapiro: So you had no religious beliefs.

Thurston: My mother was allowed to take me to a Christian Science Sunday
School, but it was understood that that religion was controversial. I
never took it up.

Shapiro: Do you know of any particular views in Christian Science of
animals?

Thurston: The only thing was that when my dog was sick they said that
was due to sin (“error”) on my part and this was being reflected in the
dog.

Shapiro: Do Christian Scientists believe that dogs can be sinners?

Thurston: I don’t know. That never came up.

Shapiro: You were the sinner.

Thurston: Yes, and it was being reflected in my dog’s unwell condition.

Shapiro: So you studied in the boarding school and you went on to
college or what?

Thurston: Then I went to Vassar College.

Shapiro: Why did you go to Vassar? Why did you choose that?

Thurston: My parents—their friends were all sending daughters to Vassar
and sons to Yale or Harvard. So that was just taken for granted that was
where you went.

Shapiro: Did you want to go there?

Thurston: Oh, yes. I was very glad to get into a place where \[there
was\] less supervision from home.

Shapiro: Some freedom. Vassar is in upstate New York.

Thurston: It’s in Poughkeepsie.

Shapiro: Poughkeepsie, New York.

Thurston: It’s co-ed now, but, of course, it was girls then.

Shapiro: Tell me about your years at Vassar. What did you study?

Thurston: Let’s see. At Vassar—I don’t know exactly when I became an
animal advocate. It was at some point during that time. I was there four
years.

Shapiro: Hold off on animals. Tell me about Vassar, and what did you
major in and what were you interested in?

Thurston:. I started with a major in music. But during the first summer
vacation, I went to France to study music with Nadia Boulanger and so
didn’t like the way music was conceived at Vassar. So I changed and
majored in psychology; I needed to know more about what makes the mind
work the way it does.

Shapiro: When did you become interested in music? How early?

Thurston: Because I have a very sharp ear for pitch, my family have no
way of knowing this does not necessitate being bound up with music heart
and soul.

Shapiro: But did you like music when you were young?

Thurston: But I liked it, yes.

Shapiro: Did you play?

Thurston: Not well.

Shapiro: What did you play?

Thurston: The piano. I don’t have good coordination, so I never played
well.

Shapiro: But did you study for years?

Thurston: I studied for years, because my mother was convinced that if I
kept at it, I could play like I would finally be able to do. But I don’t
have good coordination.

Shapiro: Did you major in music? You started in music.

Thurston: Yes, I started to major in music.

Shapiro: Then you changed major.

Thurston: Changed major to psychology.

Shapiro: What was your interest in psychology besides how people tick?

Thurston: I wanted to find out why I was so different from other people.

Shapiro: So you were interested in yourself. In what way did you think
you were different from other people?

Thurston: I don’t recall that very well.

Shapiro: Okay. But you were curious about yourself and about you
compared to other people.

Thurston: Yes. And curious about other people, too.

Shapiro: Did you learn stuff about other people and yourself?

Thurston: They seem to take for granted a lot of things, which I thought
had to be reasoned out.

Shapiro: For example?

Thurston: The usual ethics. I thought it should be reasoned out from the
ground up, but most of my friends were satisfied with the conservative
ethic of those days.

Shapiro: Give me an example of something in ethics that you disagreed
with other people on conventional ethics.

Thurston: One example is the treatment of animals.

Shapiro: In what way?

Thurston: Most fellow students who had little contact with animals
except as meat on their plates thought that animals were to be used by
people in whatever way was convenient because people were intelligent
and animals were not. Along with many horse and dog “owners,” I thought
that that, whether a being was intelligent or not intelligent, was not a
proper thing on which to base judgment. Besides, animals have some
intelligence.

Shapiro: But that intelligence wasn’t the whole story anyway.

Thurston: Yes. Whether they deserved justice or any kind of particular
treatment.

Shapiro: Did you study ethics at Vassar?

Thurston: There was no course in ethics. I wanted one.

Shapiro: The philosophy department didn’t \[have one\]?

Thurston: I tried to get into some philosophy courses which covered
ethics in part of the course. The teacher of that course didn’t know
what I was trying to do—I probably didn’t explain it very well—and gave
me a very theoretical book on ethics and said, “You read that. If you
can master that, you will know how to proceed with ethics.” I couldn’t
understand it at all, so I gave up.

Shapiro: But you had your own sense of ethics.

Thurston: Yes. I hoped to find views in academic ethics which agreed
with some of my views. I found no studies in the Vassar library then on
ethics toward animals.

Shapiro: Do you remember any of your psychology courses? What was your
favorite course in psychology?

Thurston: I was interested in the permissive psychology courses to help
students choose their own ethics and their own ways of life.

Shapiro: Because you felt that you had lost your—

Thurston: If you followed only the conventions, you’d be trapped.

Shapiro: Anything else you want to tell me about Vassar? How was your
social life? Were you happy there?

Thurston: Oh, yes. I had some good friends there.

Shapiro: Any involvements in any clubs or activities or anything else
you did at Vassar?

Thurston: I was mostly interested in the studies and not so much the
activities. The latter were not very interesting.

Shapiro: Were you a good student?

Thurston: Yes, I was. I had a high average and made Phi Beta Kappa.

Shapiro: Phi Beta Kappa from Vassar. Great. Should we move on to—did you
go to further schooling? You had further schooling after Vassar?

Thurston: A lot of schooling later, but I didn’t want to go to any more
schooling right away. So I moved here to New York. A friend and I had an
apartment around the corner from here.

Shapiro: What year was that?

Thurston: That was the academic year 1933 to ’34.

Shapiro: You did practice teaching in a number of schools.

Thurston: I finally ended up with the Bank Street School.

Shapiro: What kind of school is that? A private school?

Thurston: A private school which is progressive, in which there is also
instruction for teaching plus supervise practice teaching. I had some
good supervision and learned to handle and teach exciting information to
a class of four-year-olds, five-year-olds, or eight-year-olds.

Shapiro: You continued being interested in progressive things because
you wanted more openness and truth.

Thurston: Our generation of children were told (regarding some lambs in
a French country market with their legs tied together) that these lambs
were on their way to a lovely field where they could play.

Shapiro: And you were interested in young kids, five, six, seven, eight
years old, teaching them?

Thurston: Yes, I was interested in not doing the same thing to them that
had been done to me. I can’t understand why the majority of people who
suffer from having been mishandled themselves don’t try to spare others
of the same thing. A lot of people badly treated as children do the same
thing when they grow up.

Shapiro: But you didn’t do that. You tried to do something about it.

Thurston: This seemed the rational thing to do, especially as I soon
began teaching myself.

Shapiro: Did you teach—how many years did you teach at the Bank Street
School?

Thurston: At the Bank Street School? That was just a teacher training
course. I was assigned as assistant to a very gifted teacher of
four-year-olds for a year and took over her class in the summer. Then I
taught in Poughkeepsie, the Poughkeepsie Day School.

Shapiro: You went back to Vassar?

Thurston: It wasn’t Vassar. The Poughkeepsie Day School was independent
of Vassar but sympathetic with their viewpoints.

Shapiro: Same town.

Thurston: I loved teaching preschoolers, especially hearing their
thoughts on all subjects, but I found that I missed music more than I
thought I would. I decided to return to the summer music school again at
Fontainebleau, France, and study with Nadia Boulanger. \[see ii.
Biographical Sketch for more information on Thurston’s relationship with
Boulanger.\]

Shapiro: Tell me about Nadia Boulanger. Who is she or what is she?

Thurston: She was a very famous teacher until her death in 1979.

Shapiro: In France.

Thurston: And \[she\] was extremely musical, very impressive, and got
her ideas across with a great deal of—

Shapiro: Expression?

Thurston: —expression and depth. Anyway, I went for the summer—

Shapiro: To France?

Thurston: —to France. Then she suggested I stay and study with her for
several years and be her assistant as soon as I was able to. I was
already teaching beginners some of the subjects.

Shapiro: It sounds like she was impressed with you.

Thurston: Well, I was impressed with her. That continued for a while,
but she was very hard to get along with. At that time (1938), she went
back and forth between France and this country. In this country she
taught at Barnard \[College\], Harvard, Wellesley, and several other
colleges. In France she taught at the Conservatoire.

Shapiro: But you stayed in France for several years.

Thurston: I came back and forth with her because my parents were here.

Shapiro: So you’re fluent in French?

Thurston: I was then pretty much, yes.

Shapiro: Were you happy with music during those years?

Thurston: I was happy with music, yes. I didn’t miss anything anymore.

Shapiro: Was there any interest or contact with animals during that
period in France and Massachusetts and during those music years?

Thurston: To some extent I forgot about them, to some extent. The study
and struggle for a career took so much time, there was little left for
them. And I was ignorant of most human-animal problems. Mademoiselle
Boulanger was for animals, because she was for those who felt, which
they did. But she said she gave up having dogs herself because they
always begged to go out and she was always having to frustrate them. I
felt that was not a solution to the greater animal-human problems, which
were probably not her job.

Shapiro: But she was sympathetic to people who had feelings or animals.

Thurston: She was sympathetic. When I started Beauty Without Cruelty
USA, she became a member.

Shapiro: The years back and forth in the USA and France, and then what
happens?

Thurston: At that time (1937 to World War II) she was at the height of
her popularity as a lecturer and as part-time professor in the best
places if they could obtain her services. So she went back and forth and
kept things going with both the organizations here and in those in
France. She was a very persuasive speaker.

Shapiro: She wasn’t a performer? Was she a performer or just a teacher?

Thurston: She could perform quite well, but she didn’t accept offers to
perform alone. She conducted or performed with others.

Shapiro: Did you perform at all?

Thurston: Did I? I performed but not well because my coordination is not
good. But the theoretical side of it I understood very well, and she
farmed me out to teach various groups and individuals.

Shapiro: To teach the theory or to teach the practice, or both?

Thurston: Theory.

Shapiro: Where do we go from there? Tell me what happens after that
period.

Thurston: Towards the end of that time (1941), I finally moved to New
York. She was just as much in New York as she was anywhere else, and I
could earn my living in New York. It was time that I should support
myself and not let my parents pay for so much education. Some nuns that
had been students of Boulanger told me that I would be well-received at
Manhattanville College, a Catholic college for girls with a music
department and choir. One of them was teaching there. The head of the
Manhattanville music department was a retired concert violinist, Georgia
Stevens, who had retired from concerts and became a nun. At
Manhattanville, she directed choir school, the Pius X School of
Gregorian Chant. I wrote a review of her efforts to revive Medieval
music, which pleased her. She invited me to come and study with her
there as preparation to continue her work when she retired. Though we
both knew that, being a nun, she would have to obey her superiors in
decisions like this. Still, it seemed as good a first step as we could
make, and she was genuine herself. So I taught and studied at
Manhattanville College.

Shapiro: It’s in Manhattan?

Thurston: Yes. It’s where City College now is, in the West 120s to 140s
in New York.

Shapiro: It’s an undergraduate school?

Thurston: Now it’s in Purchase, New York.

Shapiro: Is it an undergraduate school or graduate or both?

Thurston: It was part graduate and part just additional school, the
choir school, which wasn’t on the graduate level.

Shapiro: Theoretical music.

Thurston: Yes. I taught harmony, counterpoint, Gregorian chant, and
organ.

Shapiro: Were you interested in Gregorian music?

Thurston: Yes. I was very interested in that, how it was put together.

Shapiro: Is that your primary interest, not classical but Gregorian?

Thurston: It was then. I taught there for several years.

Shapiro: What year are we up to now in your life? How old are you?

Thurston: Let’s see. After several years, that would be during the war.
That would be 1944 and ’45. Let’s see, after that—oh, yes. Some
differences made it hard to work with the nuns. They thought that
Gregorian chant was music for all time and is the best of all music and
didn’t give very much respect to the great composers, even those who
wrote masses and other sacred music. We came across other conflicts. I
remember a scene. Mother Stevens asked me to take over a class of people
who wanted to join her choir but needed to learn to sing from the
printed notes. There is more than one system for learning sight-singing.
I chose one with which the class was already a little familiar with, and
as we were going ahead with that, in walked Mother Stevens to encourage
the newcomers. It turned out she had wanted another system (for some
good reasons). She was furious and banished me from the class in front
of the students. So I thought it was time to look for a job somewhere
else. Later this was patched up but never very well.

One of my summer school students was a nun who taught in Minnesota at
the College of St. Catherine and offered me a teaching position there. I
liked her job description and accepted. I liked the idea of revisiting
my birthplace.

Shapiro: You took a job in Minnesota?

Thurston: In Minnesota. But I was homesick there this time.

Shapiro: Let me just ask you—

Thurston: The College of St. Catherine.

Shapiro: During those years at Manhattanville and Minneapolis, did you
have animals? You did not have animals?

Thurston: I wasn’t well enough off to have animals. I would have liked
to have animals. I missed them.

Shapiro: But you were aware that you missed them.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: During that time when you were studying sacred music, did you
become religious or you still weren’t religious?

Thurston: I became religious.

Shapiro: In what way?

Thurston: I became a Catholic.

Shapiro: When did you become a Catholic?

Thurston: In 1943.

Shapiro: Did you believe in God before that or just started then?

Thurston: No.

Shapiro: You began to believe in God in ’43? You were converted to
Christianity and became a believer.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Are you to this day?

Thurston: Yes. As far as animals are concerned, I just didn’t like from
the beginning the attitudes the Catholic Church had towards animals, but
that was not an essential.

Shapiro: When you say from the beginning, you mean in ’43 when you
became Catholic you didn’t like their view then.

Thurston: That’s true. I still don’t. But Mother Stevens, the person I
worked with, said that—

Shapiro: In Minnesota or in Manhattanville?

Thurston: In Manhattanville. It was at Manhattanville that I became a
Catholic. She said that the Catholic Church never stays the same; it
always changes. Mother Stevens thought that the Catholic Church would
eventually mature to the point where they consider animals—that’s what
she insisted, because I think she thought I wouldn’t convert if I wasn’t
assured of that. She may have felt that way herself.

Shapiro: But you were critical of the Catholic view of animals.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: What was, in your view, the Catholic attitude toward animals?

Thurston: What was my view?

Shapiro: Of the Catholic view.

Thurston: The view of the priests and Catholics I knew was that animals
were for the use of humans. I didn’t think so.

Shapiro: So you moved back to Minnesota in the mid-40s.

Thurston: For one year.

Shapiro: Tell me about your mother and father at this point.

Thurston: They were dismayed at my becoming Catholic because my mother
is a Christian Scientist and feels that the Catholic Church is the prime
enemy of Christian Science.

Shapiro: Did you stay close? Were you close to your folks?

Thurston: And my father believed in freedom of conscience, so he was my
ally. But he didn’t like it at all.

Shapiro: Were you close to your parents at this time?

Thurston: No. I was never very close to them.

Shapiro: You were never very close to them?

Thurston: Never very close to them.

Shapiro: How do you understand not being close to your parents? Why
weren’t you close to your parents?

Thurston: Why I was not close? I don’t know why I was not. I think it
goes back to my being sent away to boarding school because my ideas
weren’t acceptable. From then on I tried to figure things for myself.

Shapiro: So you were very much on your own.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: And you had no partner in that time? You had no boyfriends or
partners?

Thurston: I had boyfriends and girlfriends.

Shapiro: Through that whole period?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Any close relation?

Thurston: Some. A Swedish lady who helped my mother run the household
when she was ill, one of several surrogate mothers.

Shapiro: You spent one year in Minnesota. Then what happened?

Thurston: I can remember coming back from Minnesota. I can remember
driving as fast as I could to get away from Minnesota, where I was
homesick and away from old friends. I then visited a friend in upstate
New York for a while.

Shapiro: In Poughkeepsie?

Thurston: No. I was advised by one of my old and close friends that it
was hard to rise professionally without more knowledge. Best to obtain
the knowledge and discipline of a Ph.D. I had to have the discipline of
an advanced degree. So I registered for Gustav Reese’s course, Music in
the Middle Ages, at NYU \[New York University\].

Shapiro: Was it musicology or was it art history?

Thurston: Musicology and music history.

Shapiro: How many years did you spend doing that?

Thurston: Let me think. I spread it out part-time, interspersed with
teaching, and it was about six or seven years. I received the NYU Ph.D.
in music in 1954.

Shapiro: Were those good years?

Thurston: Yes, some of them were good years. There were interesting
things. Oh, I got the degree not until ’54, because I was earning my
living part-time.

Shapiro: Doing what?

Thurston: I was teaching privately.

Shapiro: Piano or theory?

Thurston: I had classes in various places and individual students.

Shapiro: What was your dissertation on?

Thurston: Transcription and analyses of the conductus in one of the 13th
century Wolfenbüttel manuscripts. It was later published by A-R
Editions.\[1\]

Shapiro: You focused on music in the Middle Ages. What does
“transcription” mean?

Thurston: To transcribe it from old notes into modern notes so that it
could be read by somebody who didn’t know how to read old notes. I
became mainly interested, as far as studies were concerned, in
techniques of transcription.

Shapiro: Sounds very theoretical.

Thurston: I wrote an article in the Gustav Reese memorial volume on
transcription and wrote a number of other articles on the subject.

Shapiro: Anything else during those years about you and your interests
or about animals—during the Ph.D. years.

Thurston: I was struggling to keep my professional head above water. I
never forgot animals, but it was during the time when I was pushed into
other things in order to survive. The musicologists that I studied with
and worked with and others, also all students—most of them were not
interested in animals, so I couldn’t learn anything very much. Insofar
as they could, my mother and aunt (who supported some of my studies)
maintained their information on animal protection, and we wrote our
protest letters.

Shapiro: But your whole world at that time was music and teaching and
studying.

Thurston: Not my whole world. Whenever there was an opportunity I would
try to find out more or learn more on animal problems and at least
protest. But during this time period there was little information on
animal problems and animal rights.

\[End Tape 1, Side A; Begin Tape 1, Side B\]

Shapiro: Let’s see. We had finished with what? Where were we? We came
back from Minnesota. Pick up the story.

Thurston: Yes. Then I started work at NYU for a Ph.D. in musicology.

Shapiro: We went through those years.

Thurston: And I took the research method course with Gustav Reese, which
was very, very good, and some absolutely useless courses.

Shapiro: Yes. You had finished the dissertation in 1954.

Thurston: I was teaching part-time in various places.

Shapiro: In the city, in New York City?

Thurston: In the city and surrounding. Then in 1957 I transcribed into
modern notes some religious plays—they were mostly Bible stories—and
prepared them with a small orchestra of about eleven instrumentalists to
do them at the Hunter College Playhouse. At that time one of my teaching
jobs was at Hunter. I worked there for at least four years to take the
place of someone \[Louise Talma\] who had taken a leave of absence to
compose an opera, which took her at least four years.

Shapiro: So you were teaching full-time at Hunter?

Thurston: I was teaching pretty much full-time there.

Shapiro: Theoretical music?

Thurston: All kinds of music—theoretical music, history of music. Then
on top of that as an extra, all of the people teaching there were
expected to put on a performance of something to show what they could
do. One of the friends that I have worked with ever since advised me on
the kind of thing to do. I transcribed a group of Medieval religious
sung plays, adding an orchestra of eleven, as I said.

Shapiro: When you said you transcribed plays, you mean the music? I
don’t understand.

Thurston: Translate the old notes into modern notes.

Shapiro: But plays don’t have music. What music?

Thurston: Some Medieval plays have all the parts sung. Real operas, with
nonstop music, were written later. Well, operas they were, but they
didn’t call them operas in those days. They were plays with the parts
sung to music. There were spaces where musical interludes could be
added, but no particular interlude was indicated. I prepared three of
these for performance \[on\] four evenings in 1957 at Hunter.

Shapiro: You transcribed the music but you didn’t play or direct.

Thurston: No, I conducted it.

Shapiro: You did conduct it?

Thurston: Yes. This is one of the few times when I’ve done it. I would
have rather had a professional conductor. I spoke to several people and
they advised me to conduct it myself because they said I knew the music
very well and no one else would be quite so familiar with it. They
thought it would come across better that way.

Shapiro: How did it go? Was it good?

Thurston: It went pretty well, yes. It got good reviews, and the Hunter
students liked it.

Shapiro: Is this something you did more than once, or you just did one
set of performances?

Thurston: Just the four performances. At that time I was also teaching
at Hunter, including the same periods of music history.

Shapiro: A number of times you have said that it’s important for you to
make your own choices, and you are progressive. But you also seem to say
a number of times that people gave you certain advice—people told you to
go to graduate school. That seems a bit of a contradiction.

Thurston: I see. Usually the advice was sought by me about particular
things, and from people who knew more about how particular things were
done than I did.

Shapiro: So you are comfortable with taking other people’s advice, but
you have your own mind.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Those years at Hunter, that takes us to the late 50s. Were you
in this apartment yet?

Thurston: No. I was on 50th Street. Let’s see. In ’57—something will
make me remember it.

Shapiro: Maybe we can work backwards. Do you want to go forward to when
you began to move back to the animal issue more directly? When did you
begin to—

Thurston: When I had an apartment of my own, then it would have been
possible to have animals.

Shapiro: When did that happen?

Thurston: I received my Ph.D. in music from NYU in 1954. This was a time
of young Catholic groups who wanted to practice Christianity in a
practical way. I was asked to teach Gregorian chant to groups of Dorothy
Day’s Catholic Worker and to provide the music for some conferences, and
I did that. In 1956 I received a leaflet in the mail that there was a
Catholic Society for Animal Welfare. It brought me back to life just
reading that there was such a thing.

Shapiro: The Catholic Society for Animal Welfare.

Thurston: That was Helen Jones. Did you know her?

Shapiro: Yes, I did know her.

Thurston: You knew her?

Shapiro: I did know her, yes.

Thurston: Did know her. Yes, she died. I liked her very well and went
way out of my way—she’s shy—I went way out of my way to invite her for
drinks and invite her for this and that to try to get to know her.

Shapiro: This is the mid-50s.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: How did you find out about the Catholic Society?

Thurston: I was on her mailing list and she just sent an announcement
that it existed and that it would have a first meeting at such-and-such
a date.

Shapiro: It was just starting?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: How did she know to send you a note? Did she know that you were
interested in animals?

Thurston: I don’t know how she knew, except that I had put on those
performances at Hunter College and there was something Catholic about
them.

Shapiro: Go ahead. You received this notice.

Thurston: Yes. And I went and I found her. She was very shy. She came to
a table in the back of the conference room, and we discussed the whole
question of animals and especially the attitude of the Catholic Church.
So I became a firm ally of hers.

Shapiro: Did she have similar views to your own about the Catholic
Church and animals?

Thurston: Yes, similar views to mine.

Shapiro: What was she working on in this new organization? What was the
organization going to be about?

Thurston: She had an organization. I think it was a membership
organization.

Shapiro: This was the Catholic Society for Animal Rights?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: That’s the new organization. That’s the organization she had.

Thurston: Yes, National Catholic Society for Animal Welfare.

Shapiro: It began around that time.

Thurston: It was a membership organization. She had meetings. Some
friends and I attended one in Washington. I don’t know whatever else she
did.

Shapiro: What issue or issues was the group interested in? Domesticated
animals? Or animal research? Or what issues?

Thurston: She was flatly anti-vivisection.

Shapiro: So they were primarily interested in animal research.

Thurston: The layman knew very little about alternatives to animals in
research. Without alternatives, it was difficult to just promote
anti-vivisection without something to offer in its place.

Shapiro: Was this a new issue to you, animal research and
anti-vivisection?

Thurston: Well, I knew that it went on. I didn’t know anything very much
about it or even that it was hard on the animals. Then she sent out a
leaflet with pictures of an extremely depressed dog subjected to
starvation experiments. I also remember some scientists who took a very
hard-line attitude towards experimental animals.

Shapiro: That is, they justified it?

Thurston: They justified it and didn’t think that the animals were worth
bothering about because they were only animals. Most scientists are
embarrassed. Even when they help animal welfare, they’re embarrassed to
do it. Later, I ran into Elinor Seiling’s group. She was convinced it is
possible and imperative to find alternatives to research animals.

Shapiro: Let’s come back to that. Can you tell me any more about Helen
Jones?

Thurston: I would have liked to have seen a great deal of her and
learned all I could. She lived near New York for a while and we met at
the end of every week’s work.

Shapiro: At these meetings?

Thurston: I would go to her weekly meetings and then meet with her
afterwards and she would unwind. The difficulty was that she was
suspicious of alternatives, as some other anti-vivisectionists are. At
least I thought so then. Maybe I was wrong. But finally I was more
interested in the groups that were trying to recommend alternatives that
could take the place of animals rather than just anti-vivisection “it’s
wrong, don’t do it.”

Shapiro: Do you remember when you learned about the idea of
alternatives, when you first learned about that?

Thurston: Yes. I learned first about alternatives from Elinor Seiling.
So I tried to make her acquaintance and became an ally of hers and a
member of her group and learn all I could.

Shapiro: That was where you learned of the idea of alternatives.

Thurston: That was where I learned it first. But her way of dealing with
the alternative question did not seem to me very practical. Then I heard
there were groups in England who seemed to be more practical.

Shapiro: When you first learned about the idea of alternatives, what did
it mean? What does “alternatives” mean?

Thurston: It meant that you could use cell culture and tissue culture to
find out a lot of things which are now being found out with animal
experiments.

Shapiro: So you would replace animal experiments with tissue
experiments?

Thurston: Then I was never able to learn whether some of these
alternatives could replace all animal experiments or only some.

Shapiro: You didn’t know.

Thurston: I didn’t know, and no one else seemed to know.

Shapiro: At what point did you learn about \[William\] Russell and
\[Rex\] Burch. They wrote a book about the Three Rs about
alternatives.\[2\] Were you familiar with them?

Thurston: Like some others, I felt then suspicious that Russell and
Burch were trying to introduce a kind of limited vivisection. I have the
Russell and Burch book; I know more about it now. Russell and Burch led
the way to viable solutions.

Shapiro: That was not how you learned about alternatives. You learned
about it through Elinor.

Thurston: Through Elinor Seiling, yes.

Shapiro: Tell me more about Elinor Seiling. Did you know her well?

Thurston: I don’t think anyone knew her well. I knew her about as well
as anyone.

Shapiro: Any impressions of Elinor Seiling, what she was like, anything
about her?

Thurston: She was rather dogmatic. But this was a new field for her, and
a person can be forgiven for this.

Shapiro: What was her dogmatism? In what way was she dogmatic, about
what?

Thurston: I think she was just saying we should use alternatives instead
of animals. She didn’t say exactly there were alternatives for
everything, but she seemed to imply this.

Shapiro: Again, you didn’t think she was practical.

Thurston: I don’t think so.

Shapiro: Were you involved in her group?

Thurston: I tried to learn more than I succeeded in learning, but she
did publish a number of accounts of alternatives which were validated
for certain cases by her science advisor. But that doesn’t mean that
they could replace all animal use.

Shapiro: Do you remember the name of her organization?

Thurston: No, I’m afraid I don’t.

Shapiro: I’m not sure, but is it United Action for Animals?

Thurston: Oh, yes. Right. United Action for Animals. That was it. Now
that you name it, I recognize it.

Shapiro: So you had some time with Elinor Seiling and learned a little
more about alternatives to animal research.

Thurston: I didn’t get in touch with the scientist, Michael Balls, head
of the European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods
(ECVAM), until much later. There was disagreement between the
alternative people here and Michael Balls. He probably became fed up
with some of them.

Shapiro: Why? What was his criticism of them?

Thurston: That they thought they knew more than they did know and they
didn’t make the effort to study, even as much of the science, as they
could have. I agree.

Shapiro: Do you want to talk about Michael Balls for a minute?

Thurston: Michael Balls is a professor of biology at Nottingham
University in England and head of the European Centre for the Validation
of Alternatives. He has worked over a decade to assist the Three Rs
(Replacement, Reduction, and Refinement) to replace animals in research
and testing. He hopes that ECVAM members can agree on realistic goals
for replacing animal use, then work together to replace animals.

Shapiro: Let’s go back to what happens after Elinor Seiling for you?
After Elinor Seiling, where do your interests go in animals and how did
that develop? Elinor Seiling must be the late 50s.

Thurston: I was very enthusiastic over alternatives. Then Colin Smith
came to the U.S. So I thought, well, I’ll try at last to get something
started. I invited him and his companion to dinner at the Russian Tea
Room. He likes the social side of his animal work the best, I think.

Shapiro: Which side is that?

Thurston: The social side, including good food.

Shapiro: Tell me about—what do you know about Colin Smith? Who was he?

Thurston: I know him quite well.

Shapiro: Tell me about him. Where was he from?

Thurston: Do you know him?

Shapiro: Yes, but this is your oral history. I’m sure you know him
better. Where was he from? What group was he with?

Thurston: He was with the National Anti-Vivisection Society \[NAVS\].

Shapiro: In what country?

Thurston: In England. Oh, yes, it’s genuine. I know him.

Shapiro: What was your impression of him? What was he like?

Thurston: I thought he might be great help and very good at it. In
England he had publicized the whole idea of alternatives well and helped
it with a big conference in London on Religion and Animals. I joined his
society. I didn’t leave it until much later when they seemed to be
losing interest in alternatives.

Shapiro: But you were a member of National Anti-Vivisection Society for
many years.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Were you active in the group?

Thurston: We met and talked quite often; he worked enthusiastically for
the social conferences.

Shapiro: So you were a bit critical of him and his interests.

Thurston: Yes. But he’s very good at social events, and I’m not. His
social gifts were very helpful.

Shapiro: He was in the United States at times?

Thurston: He came very often to the United States. I assisted him
financially in doing this.

Shapiro: I see. When did you start becoming financially involved?

Thurston: Oh, I don’t remember. Not very much financially involved. In
the 60s, I think.

Shapiro: So he would come, and you invited him for a dinner or
something? What was that?

Thurston: Yes. I invited him to dinner and I invited him to meet this
and that and the other person who I thought might help him. Among
others, I attended meetings in England and one in Milan.

Shapiro: So now you’ve been involved in three different groups—the
Catholic group, and the Elinor Seiling group, and the Colin group.

Thurston: Yes. The Elinor Seiling group came to an end when she became
ill and died.

Shapiro: Recently, a few years ago.

Thurston: Yes. The Catholic group collected many non-Catholics but few
Catholics.

Shapiro: You moved away from them.

Thurston: Finally I was mainly with Colin Smith’s group, the English
NAVS.

Shapiro: That was interested in alternatives.

Thurston: Yes. I was also often in touch with Lady \[Muriel\] Dowding
before her death. Her name and hard work supported Colin’s efforts.

Shapiro: She supported Colin’s efforts.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Who was she?

Thurston: She and Lord \[Hugh\] Dowding were commoners who met after the
Battle of Britain, after he was knighted for the part he played in the
Royal Air Force. I met her just one year after Lord Dowding’s death.

Shapiro: Do you remember when that was?

Thurston: Let’s see. Sometime in the 60s, as far as I can remember.

Shapiro: You met Lady Dowding on one occasion?

Thurston: I went with Lady Dowding—

Shapiro: Did you meet her?

Thurston: Oh, yes. Now I remember. I made an opportunity to meet her. I
went to a vegetarian conference in Holland, and I learned there that
there was to be a conference with Lady Dowding’s group in Switzerland.
So I went to Switzerland. They all got together to have dinner after the
meeting, and I managed to find myself next to her at dinner. We talked
of common interests. I said that I might be able to sponsor a lecture
tour for her in the United States, where the substitution of
alternatives to animals is not well known or much thought about.

Shapiro: Was Lady Dowding connected to NAVS or did she have her own
group?

Thurston: She was president of NAVS and Colin was, and still is,
secretary general.

Shapiro: Let me just go back a minute. For the first time you mentioned
the word “vegetarian.” When and are you a vegetarian? When did you
become a vegetarian and are you a vegetarian?

Thurston: I can’t remember exactly when. Most of my colleagues in animal
defense were vegetarian, and one summer (about 1970) I made up my mind
not to eat any creature that tries to run, swim, or fly away.

Shapiro: So that was in about 1970.

Thurston: That was about 1970.

Shapiro: Had you ever thought about it before? Before that, had you
thought about eating meat?

Thurston: Yes, since childhood, but I assumed I would lose my strength
if I didn’t eat a carnivorous diet.

Shapiro: You thought you needed to eat meat in order to have energy.

Thurston: Yes. I assumed that. There was no reason to assume it, but I
did assume it.

Shapiro: A lot of people did and do. So you have been a vegetarian since
about 1970.

Thurston: Since then, yes.

Shapiro: Are you a vegan or a vegetarian?

Thurston: I’m almost a hundred percent vegan, but once in a while, if
I’m with people who don’t know what a vegan is and they serve a dairy
product, there is no use upsetting them and I eat some cheese or other
dairy product—never meat.

Shapiro: So Lady Dowding—you approached her with the idea of you helping
her in the U.S. She suggested a lecture series on alternatives in the
United States . What was that about?

Thurston: She first suggested it, that she would like to have a lecture
tour and would come if there was a way to guarantee that the lectures
would cover the cost of the journey. I said I thought I could do it.

Shapiro: That is, you could set it up or you could pay for it?

Thurston: Then I did do it.

Shapiro: What did you do?

Thurston: I got her lecture engagements in about five places which were
paid and then some unpaid ones, which she was much better at. That took
a lot of preparation and a lot of time, and it took place.

Shapiro: What did she talk about in the lectures? Was it about
alternatives or about animal research more generally?

Thurston: Not so much alternatives because she didn’t have much science
understanding.

Shapiro: What did she talk about?

Thurston: She talked about the suffering of animals and how it was not
over-difficult to prevent.

Shapiro: Was she talking about animals in research or more generally?
Just research?

Thurston: In research and in food. She said it was very easy to be a
vegetarian.

Shapiro: At this time in your life you were spending more time on the
animal issue. Full-time or part-time? Were you also working?

Thurston: I was teaching at the Manhattan College of Music.

Shapiro: Full-time?

Thurston: I think so. I started Beauty Without Cruelty USA in 1973 with
Lady Dowding’s permission. It included writing leaflets and
disseminating them.

Shapiro: On what? What were the leaflets about?

Thurston: On animal protection from human exploitation, and
vegetarianism, and alternatives to animal research.

Shapiro: Your idea at that time was primarily that alternatives meant
tissue culture instead of the whole animal?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: But you weren’t taking a position that all animal research
could be replaced.

Thurston: I for myself had the position of not using anything which had
been tested on animals or had animal flesh. The public position was not
quite so strict.

Shapiro: Why, because you didn’t think it would be acceptable, or you
weren’t sure?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Were you sure? What was your feeling?

Thurston: I was sure that it was better not to eat meat or use animals
at all, but I promoted this other because I thought the strict goal
would be rejected.

Shapiro: Let me go just a little bit further. When you say that it was
better not to use animals, did you think—

Thurston: You can choose not to use animals, at least when there is a
validated alternative. One should be decent enough to pay a little more
for the research to locate and validate these.

Shapiro: But did you feel that biomedicine would suffer for not using
animals, or did you feel that we could replace animals?

Thurston: That, you see, I didn’t know. I didn’t know.

Shapiro: Do you know it now?

Thurston: No, I don’t. If manufacturers, motivated by their buyers, had
engaged in a full-blown effort to replace animals from the 1960s on,
they might know enough by now to replace all or almost all. But as it
is, they didn’t and scientific information on validity of animal and
non-animal tests is not readily available to buyers yet.

Shapiro: It seems to you that if they had taken a different path
starting in the late 60s or 70s, we might have been away from the use of
many or most animals.

Thurston: Yes, if there had been a nationwide effort the way there are
sometimes.

Shapiro: Did you have a hope at that time that there would be that kind
of effort?

Thurston: I didn’t think it would be likely. Would you think it would be
likely?

Shapiro: It’s hard to retell history, but I don’t know. It certainly is
plausible that we would have taken a different path.

Thurston: We could have, but enough buyers did not buy selectively to
encourage industry in non-animal testing. And it would have been
different without government support. And the government wouldn’t
support it, taking sides with industry.

Shapiro: So in 1973 you started writing your own brochures and tracts
and fliers to get those who wanted justice for animals to buy
selectively and support animals with their buyers’ dollars.

Thurston: Yes. I wrote a brochure for Helen Jones as to how one can
avoid—how it’s possible right now to help the movement by not buying
items tested on animals or manufactured with animal matter.

Shapiro: Where did you get that idea?

Thurston: Elinor Seiling. She deserves the credit, and Lady Dowding’s
Beauty Without Cruelty.

Shapiro: This was the idea of Beauty Without Cruelty.

Thurston: Yes. Helen Jones was very interested in Beauty Without
Cruelty, though I was not free to write all of what was needed for her
publications.

Shapiro: In the 70s you started becoming more involved in writing stuff.
And what happened?

Thurston: Let’s see. I joined NAVS and wrote quite a few articles for
them and distributed them from here and didn’t need to start any other
organization. The NAVS seemed to be very well set up for promoting
selective buying. I did that until Colin and I came to a division of
opinion about the importance of alternatives three or four years ago.

Shapiro: When does AFAAR enter the story? I’m wondering when the
American Fund for Animal Research comes into the story.

Thurston: That started in 1973. Colin and Jon Evans, then president of
NAVS, came to this country and asked if I would start an American branch
of the English NAVS. So we named it American Fund for Alternatives to
Animal Research. We dined with Tom Regan at the Russian Tea Room to
celebrate the inauguration. Until 1973 I was writing for the English
NAVS.

Shapiro: Did you study scientific literature?

Thurston: I studied as much as I could, but I don’t know enough
chemistry to understand all of it; still I could understand some, due to
the continued assistance of John Petricciani, now retired member of the
U.S. FDA \[Food and Drug Administration\]. He led me to realize that
reformers of science must understand science by working with scientists.
We wrote an article together called “Regulation, Abolition, or
Alternative Research,” published in The California Veterinarian and
disseminated in leaflet form.

Shapiro: How did you get the idea that you had to work with scientists,
because a lot of the earlier people, the anti-vivisectionists, felt that
they couldn’t work with scientists.

Thurston: Most of my fellow animal reformers, then, were convinced
scientists were bad. Even if they were scientists who were favorable
towards anti-vivisection, they’re still unreliable. Well, that’s where I
had such trouble getting along with animal people. Even Colin is a
little bit that way. It makes good drama, bad science, and
misinformation.

Shapiro: How come you were different? Why were you different about that
and how did you know? How did you come to the view that you could work
or had to work with scientists?

Thurston: I had studied a certain amount of science—enough to realize
that you had to understand science if you were going to reform it.

Shapiro: So you weren’t anti-science.

Thurston: No. And then John Petricciani got me to realize that you had
to work with scientists. My search then became, and still is, to find
scientists who wanted to end the use of animals as a goal, but not in
any over-hasty way (which would slow progress down). The first scientist
who helped me in this was John Petricciani, to whom I owe very much. The
most recent is the late Björn Ekwall, to whom we also owe a lot.

Shapiro: Tell us about John Petricciani.

Thurston: We worked with him for several years. He and I wrote a leaflet
called “Regulation, Abolition, and Alternative Research.” If you can
give me that small one. That’s it.

Shapiro: Where did you meet him? Do you remember?

Thurston: How did I meet him? Our second meeting was in the bar of the
Russian Tea Room; our third was in his beautiful house in Washington
which he bought and renovated.

Shapiro: What school is he or was he at? Do you remember?

Thurston: He was with the U.S. FDA, then worked as a scientist with
several industries.

Shapiro: He is scientific advisor to American Fund for Alternatives to
Animal Research. You don’t remember how you met him?

Thurston: How I met him?

Shapiro: Yes. Where, how, when.

Thurston: Some person in the anti-vivisection movement introduced us.

Shapiro: I don’t know him \[Petricciani\]. I haven’t met him.
\[Telephone rings; tape interruption\].

Thurston: I was particularly interested because he had a position as a
scientist and was thought well of by colleagues. So he was able to do
things, understand the problem better through that point of view.

Shapiro: But he was already interested in tissue culture or did you
interest him in that?

Thurston: Tissue culture is his and many others’ field of science. He
realized better than any of the animal defenders just how far tissue
culture might be able to go.

\[End Tape 1, Side B; Begin Tape 2, Side A\]

Shapiro: We had mentioned that you started AFAAR in 1973.

Thurston: AFAAR in 1973. Colin and Jon Evans, then president of the
English NAVS, came to the U.S. and asked me if I would start an American
branch of NAVS. They had wanted it to be more closer to NAVS than it
was, but anyway, that’s what started, and we got along pretty well.

Shapiro: What was your position in AFAAR? Were you the executive
director? What were you?

Thurston: I was executive director. I wasn’t voted in. They just asked
me to do it. I didn’t know any people that we could form a group with.

Shapiro: So it was not a member group?

Thurston: Well, it has become one now.

Shapiro: Was it independent or was it part of NAVS?

Thurston: It had to be independent in order to be properly registered
here; also to be able to adapt to conditions in a different country.
Colin and Jon wanted this.

Shapiro: So it was incorporated in the United States, in New York?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Were you paid?

Thurston: No.

Shapiro: So you had this new organization. What did you do?

Thurston: I sent out newsletters on the alternative progress (or lack of
it) in the U.S. three times a year to a mailing list that I had put
together from interested people. That was just about it. I kept very
much in touch with Colin. Colin would telephone once a week at least and
came here often.

Shapiro: What projects besides the newsletter—what projects did AFAAR
have?

Thurston: Not very much. It was mostly to educate the public as to what
was happening and what could be encouraged to happen.

Shapiro: I had the impression you were involved with giving moneys for
researchers to do alternatives.

Thurston: Yes, we did that.

Shapiro: Tell me about that.

Thurston: We started raising funds for alternative research. A lot of
people sent in funds. I put together a board of vice presidents and,
with their permission, have given various grants to scientists for
alternative research. We knew enough sympathetic scientists to form a
board of advisors to choose among the applicants. Those of us who are
not scientists do not choose these—only the scientists.

Shapiro: Do you remember who the first grantee was?

Thurston: John Petricciani.

Shapiro: The first one was John Petricciani.

Thurston: Yes. I will get a list of scientists who received AFAAR grants
mailed in to you.\[3\]

Shapiro: Was that your idea to give moneys or was that something that
NAVS was already doing in England or what?

Thurston: It was not my idea, because NAVS had a section in which they
gave financial support.

Shapiro: Do you remember other grantees?

Thurston: Yes. We gave one to Björn Ekwall before his death. There were
a number of people suggested by Colin’s group—Robert Sharpe in the early
days.

Shapiro: Did Robert Sharpe actually do alternatives research?

Thurston: Yes. Or his own research in alternative research. I have a
list of his projects.

Shapiro: That’s okay. I have this list that has some of them. What
about—

Thurston: Let me look at this one.

Shapiro: \[Roland\] Nardone—he was important, wasn’t he?

Thurston: Very much so. He taught classes for teenage science majors for
several summers with AFAAR grants, then became our advisor. Konstantin
Chumakov is a fairly late one. He was recommended to us by Inessa
Levenbook.

Shapiro: I don’t know who that is.

Thurston: She has now become one of our science advisors. She was a head
of a department in the FDA \[Food and Drug Administration\]. Then she
retired. Now that she’s retired from the FDA she can be more outspoken
in what she does and says. She joined—became one of our vice presidents.
I asked also Barbara Orlans if she would become a vice president, but
she said she was very sympathetic with what we did but she didn’t want
to become vice president of any group. The person really central to the
alternatives movement was Björn Ekwall, who was devoted to alternative
development and knew the alternative scientists throughout Europe and
the value of their work.

Shapiro: Let’s talk about him.

Thurston: He knew people who were doing it and what the value of their
work was. It was a real blow to lose him.

Shapiro: He’s just died recently?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Do you remember when you got connected with him, how far back?

Thurston: Practically at the beginning.

Shapiro: Where was he from?

Thurston: Sweden.

Shapiro: What can you tell us about him? Did you meet him personally?

Thurston: I met him among a group of European scientists being supported
by or advising the Lord Dowding Fund for Humane Research. When he spoke,
everyone stopped speaking and listened. I met him personally a number of
times.

Shapiro: Let’s stop then and we’ll pick up tomorrow.

\[End of Session\].

Ethel Thurston

Session \#2

May 11, 2001

New York, New York

Kenneth Shapiro, Interviewer

\[Continue Tape 2, Side A\]

Shapiro: You’ve rested up from our first session. We’re ready to
continue and finish up your history. There are a couple of loose ends
that we’ll try to fill in as we go along, but let’s go back to the
formation of AFAAR and one of the primary projects of AFAAR, which was
giving grants to scientists to develop and to disseminate alternative
procedures to replace animal research. We had talked about Petricciani.
I wondered if you could tell me a little bit more about John
Petricciani.

Thurston: In order to give grants to scientists it was necessary to have
an advisor who is a scientist—or more advisors—to see which are
worthwhile and to find a means of working with scientists. They know
very little—most of them—about animal protection, and animal protection
knows very little about the requirements scientists must meet. The main
purpose then is to discuss all the ins and outs of replacing animals
with scientists, what is worthwhile and what isn’t, and what could
interest other scientists in joining the effort.

Shapiro: Who were some of the advisors?

Thurston: The first one that we worked with, who urged us to work in
this way, was John Petricciani, who was working with the U.S. Government
when we first knew him. He’s now retired and we still consult him now
and then, though he doesn’t want to be consulted often.

Shapiro: Do you remember what agency or department in the U.S.
Government he was with?

Thurston: It was the FDA.

Shapiro: Tell me a little bit about him? What were his views?

Thurston: He was a very nice person to work with, partly because he had
all kinds of interests outside of science. He had a charming house in
Washington. We often went there to talk with him. Our guests from
England also went there to talk with him. I noticed this house had a
number of paintings on the walls, obviously done by the same person. It
turned out that they were paintings by him and that he did a lot of
painting in his spare time. We spoke some of the same language through
our connection to the arts.

Shapiro: So you could relate to that.

Thurston: Yes. I think that was one reason that he liked working with
us, because some of the people connected with us were also interested in
the arts.

Shapiro: What were his views on animal research and the animal
protection movement?

Thurston: He said that there was no immediate way to replace all of
animals, but it was impossible to say that that could not be achieved
sometime in the future, perhaps even the near future, because there is
so much change in science that what would be thought impossible today is
done tomorrow. He wrote that in the leaflet-article that he and I wrote
together on alternatives, “Regulation, Abolition, or Alternative
Research.”

Shapiro: We’ll add the papers yet. Who were some other advisors in the
early years and other grantees?

Thurston: One of the people who first received grants was Roland
Nardone, professor of biology at Catholic University at the time. He’s
now retired.

Shapiro: In Washington, DC.

Thurston: Washington, DC. We financed a course which he gave every July.
He thought a very good idea would be to teach students of high school
age. So he organized that course and taught it brilliantly himself. I
took the course along with my then assistant to see how it was done. The
course interested me enormously, but it didn’t seem to appeal to science
students of that age. They simply wanted to learn as much science as
they could in order to advance their careers and get a good job. Also,
Ann Free, a Washington activist, also worked with him and young students
and had the same experience.

Shapiro: It was not appropriate for high school students.

Thurston: Apparently so.

Shapiro: Did you change that?

Thurston: We moved on to college students and it’s gotten a little
better. The response was better. His course was extremely interesting
and clearly and attractively delivered.

Shapiro: Did you have a program also for teachers?

Thurston: Yes, we did.

Shapiro: When was that held?

Thurston: Judging by the letters that came in, which he sent me copies
of, the teachers were very enthusiastic about it and said that they were
going to add a great deal of what he said in his course in their
courses, which they hadn’t known enough about before. That continued
over quite a few years that that went on.

Shapiro: He was teaching them cell culture techniques?

Thurston: Yes, cell culture techniques and how they can replace animals.

Shapiro: Was he pretty up front about ethics or no?

Thurston: I think he was, yes. He was interested in getting animals
replaced. He found it not easy with colleagues.

Shapiro: Do you know more about his views? Was he an animal rights
person?

Thurston: He never said exactly where he stood with regards to animal
rights. He said it would be good to replace all animals if it could be
done, but not in any way to harm science at all.

Shapiro: You say that you folks were not completely with animal rights.

Thurston: We could sometimes do without some of the science and stay
with the science which was essential, if it was absolutely essential.

Shapiro: Did you consider yourself and do you consider yourself an
animal rights person? Do you believe animals have rights?

Thurston: Yes, I think so.

Shapiro: You mentioned an assistant. Was someone working with you?

Thurston: I had a girl, Deborah Francis, who worked as secretary, but
she was interested enough to come to all these courses and meetings.
Most of the secretaries I’m able to find now are just interested in
working by the hour. Since the 1970s I haven’t had any secretary who was
interested in the movement and wanted to learn all she could about
alternatives to research animals.

Shapiro: So you basically worked on your own.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: With some office help.

Thurston: Since then, since the 1970s, I’ve worked pretty much on my
own. It’s been a different kind of mentality among the generation which
matured after the 70s.

Shapiro: What’s that difference?

Thurston: They are interested in a job, but they are not interested in
what that job is to accomplish in society. I would have thought at that
age that in order to have such a job one should be interested and
knowledgeable about what that job would accomplish in society. But this
generation, a large proportion of them, are not.

Shapiro: You never drew any from the animal protection people, from the
animal rights movement, for jobs?

Thurston: They are terrible at science.

Shapiro: In your experience the animal rights people are not good at
science.

Thurston: Not understanding enough and haven’t had even the small amount
of background that they would need to understand a scientist’s point of
view. They are inclined to be suspicious even of scientists trying to
help us. In fact, Michael Balls, head of the European Centre for the
Validation of Alternative Methods, has criticized American animal
defense for that.

Shapiro: Suspicious of what?

Thurston: They’re suspicious of science, that science will lead the way
and there will be no consideration for the subjects.

When you nod your head, do you agree with the viewpoint or just say
you’re considering it?

Shapiro: I agree to some extent that one of the problems in the animal
rights movement has been that the people—some of them—are too
anti-science and don’t know enough about science to reform it. I agree
with you.

Thurston: They certainly are. They’ve become a little less so, but they
always want to dominate the situation, even PETA \[People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals\], sometimes especially PETA.

Shapiro: What are your views of PETA?

Thurston: They want good publicity and they’re very good at that, but
they don’t get it always for the right things.

Shapiro: What’s your general feeling about PETA? Do you feel that they
have helped?

Thurston: They’re very good at making things known and discussed.

Shapiro: Do you want to comment about some other groups while we’re
talking about that, other animal groups and your views of them?

Thurston: Yes. The HSUS \[Humane Society of the United States\] has some
new people engaged in it. They seem to be more understanding than either
PETA or some of the other animal rights groups. I’m waiting to see what
they do.

Shapiro: What other groups do you want to comment on? I think you
mentioned IDA yesterday, In Defense of Animals. I think you mentioned
that.

Thurston: I don’t know very much about them. I don’t get much of their
information. I get information from most of the other groups.

Shapiro: How do you feel about the three A-V groups, the three
anti-vivisection groups?

Thurston: NEAVS \[New England Anti-Vivisection Society\] I like. They
work with scientists and state government and understand the situation,
I think, the best of any that I know.

Shapiro: That’s New England.

Thurston: Mention some other societies and I’ll see if I know them well
enough to comment.

Shapiro: There’s the American Anti-Vivisection \[Society\].

Thurston: Yes. Like NEAVS, they have more understanding than most. Then
the one in Chicago.

Shapiro: The National.

Thurston: Those are the three that I think are going ahead with a new
focus—new information and ways of looking at it.

Shapiro: How do you feel about grassroots groups, activist groups, local
groups, as opposed to national groups? Do you have a feeling on that?

Thurston: The ones here in New York are connected, some of them, with
New York University. They are very young. My present assistant is
working with them. But they are more concerned with mounting protests
and putting down animal research than they are with what to do instead.
They need to educate themselves on what to do instead. They are at the
stage in life when the power of protest or sit-in against those in
authority can be intoxicating.

Shapiro: And you’re generally not sympathetic?

Thurston: I try to be sympathetic because I feel the pain that they do
when they read or hear of the animals’ suffering and helplessness. Those
are only part of the things. Then comes the work to develop the
alternatives, find the manufacturers and scientists interested in using
them, then putting them in to actual use.

Shapiro: Do you think there is any room for or significance to or
contribution from the sit-ins and the protests of the activist
campaigns? Do you think they’re of any use?

Thurston: Yes, because sometimes the animal users just need to be
pushed. So they are of some use, but they are not the only thing.

Shapiro: I want to go back to a couple of these other people that I know
you supported through grants. There is \[Ruy\] Tchao. Do you remember
him?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Do you remember him?

Thurston: I remember him.

Shapiro: What’s your impression of him?

Thurston: We had some difficulty because of his wife. At the time he
started research for the grant, his wife asked if she could borrow some
musical documents of mine from France because she was going to make a
tour of China and would interest people in China on those. I never saw
the documents again. I don’t think Tchao himself was responsible for
that, but he couldn’t get anywhere with his wife. The grant came to a
stop. He had received some funds from us, but he did not send a report
on the research, if done.

Shapiro: It was that important that the grant stopped?

Thurston: He stopped the grant, not AFAAR.

Shapiro: Any other impressions of him?

Thurston: Before the grant, he sent me excellent reports of conferences
given in languages I do not know. I liked him very much. There was
nothing that could be done. He had to be loyal to his wife and cover for
her.

Then Nardone continued his series of classes in alternatives every July.
He ended up giving three classes—one for teachers, one for high school
students, one for college students. In giving these classes, he found
that he had to do it quite differently for all three. I have a whole
series of copies of letters, mainly from the teachers, who wrote him or
me that those classes were valuable to them and would be included in
large part in their future teaching. Unfortunately, he came to the point
where he was obliged to retire, so the classes were stopped. He still
teaches some alternatives in an organization of his own called RM
Associates.

Shapiro: Is that related to alternatives?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: In what way? What does it do?

Thurston: Since I no longer support him, I do not ask for reports. He
has support for RM Associates. He gained support for that and didn’t ask
AFAAR for support. So that was, again, another plus.

Shapiro: So as far as you know, he’s doing something along the lines of
tissue culture.

Thurston: Oh, yes. He doesn’t use animals. None of the scientists that
we’ve given grants to use animals and have not used them for quite some
time. They are specialists in cell and organ culture.

Shapiro: How about Joseph Leighton? Do you remember him?

Thurston: Yes. He was the first scientist to receive a grant from us. We
had Canadian supporters who contributed to that grant.

Shapiro: He is Canadian, Leighton?

Thurston: No. He was recommended to them by a Canadian scientist for
whom they had great admiration and trust. He made innovations in the
tissue culture field and wrote articles which are well known to
scientists in the field, though not to the public.

Shapiro: Again, was he simply a biologist who happened to do tissue
culture, or did he have a special interest in animal protection and
advocacy?

Thurston: He did have interest in animal protection. None of them had as
much interest as we, but some had a strong interest, and he especially.

Shapiro: We spoke a little about Björn Ekwall, but I don’t think we
finished with him.

Thurston: Björn Ekwall was our best advisor because he was very keen and
well informed on replacements. He knew scientists all over Europe who
were doing them. His colleagues think he was more able than most to
ascertain which would be successful or not. I had very long
conversations over the telephone with him over the years and learned a
great deal about how the alternative situation works and doesn’t work.

Shapiro: Were you encouraged by him, do you think?

Thurston: Yes. His death was a big blow and shock, because he didn’t
want people to know that he was terminally ill. He phoned and told me a
few days before his death.

Shapiro: When did he die? Do you remember?

Thurston: About a year ago. There isn’t anyone at all who can take his
place or is interested in taking his place.

Shapiro: What about the MEIC project that Ekwall was involved with?

Thurston: I have heard almost nothing from MEIC, the Multicenter
Evaluation of In Vitro Cytotoxicity, since Björn Ekwall’s death.

Shapiro: Do you know what MEIC was about?

Thurston: Ekwall got together about fifty test chemicals for which both
human and animal data are known. With the human data, human and animal
cell tests and whole animals tests can be compared. By the early 1990s,
sixty-four in vitro tests have been thus validated using advanced human
data for fifty chemicals.

Shapiro: Can you tell us anything about Ekwall personally?

Thurston: Personally we were at ease with one another in that way, in
contrast to some other scientists that we worked with who seemed to want
to address us at AFAAR as if they were addressing a class. The
relationship was not very personal, and we were happy to have it that
way as long as they gave us the information.

Shapiro: When you say “us,” who are you referring to?

Thurston: On the telephone it was me representing AFAAR, the people that
support AFAAR, our board of directors. I kept them informed.

Shapiro: Anybody on your board of directors that we haven’t mentioned
that you’d like to mention?

Thurston: Yes. My board of directors leave all the work to me.
\[Laughter\]. They don’t know very much about science and they can’t
really do very much. I get their approval when I give a grant, but I’m
not able—I don’t think they’re able to understand and they simply leave
it up to me. And I leave it up to our very carefully chosen science
advisors.

Shapiro: So they’re not an active board.

Thurston: Now that Theo Capaldo is with us, I hope that the board will
be more active.

Shapiro: We talked some about AFAAR. What about the other project or
organization that you’re involved with, Beauty Without Cruelty? Tell me
about that organization. How did that start?

Thurston: That was founded before I got in touch with England very much.
It was founded in England by Lady Dowding. She published leaflet
articles and encouraged the members to buy only beauty products which
had not involved testing or animal bodies at all and letting them know
where these could be procured.

Shapiro: How did you get involved in that?

Thurston: Helen Jones told me about it, and I felt that was a very good
system, getting people to become involved in their personal lives and
make humane choices among those which they already made anyway among
beauty products of all different kinds.

Shapiro: Roughly what time did you become involved in that, what year?

Thurston: The late 60s and 70s.

Shapiro: Before AFAAR or after AFAAR?

Thurston: That came before AFAAR. It started and continued along with
AFAAR. AFAAR started in 1973.

Shapiro: Was this an incorporated group? Beauty Without Cruelty—is it
incorporated in the United States?

Thurston: Yes. It was a membership group.

Shapiro: Did you incorporate it?

Thurston: Yes. It was permitted by the government to exist as a group
and to collect funds and spend them.

Shapiro: Was it a 501(c)(3)?

Thurston: Yes. Both Beauty Without Cruelty and AFAAR were 501(c)(3)s.

Shapiro: Were you the primary person in the United States?

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Was the organization separate from the one in England?

Thurston: That was in England and that was separate. At first I joined
the English organization as an individual. Then Colin Smith came over
here and asked me if I would start a Beauty Without Cruelty and AFAAR
here. He was more interested in the AFAAR, but we started both.

Shapiro: He approached you?

Thurston: On Lady Dowding’s behalf. He was becoming more active in the
organization as she became older and less active.

Shapiro: Did the money for the two groups in the United States come from
the U.S.?

Thurston: The money came from the United States. I had belonged to the
English group as an individual. The money for the U.S. Beauty Without
Cruelty and AFAAR came from here. For incorporation here, U.S.
incorporation is required.

Shapiro: From grants or from individuals or what?

Thurston: The grants came from American money.

Shapiro: Do you want to say some of the people who gave you grants? Do
you remember some of the granting foundations or organizations?

Thurston: Most of the money was from individuals, not foundations. But
sometimes it would be an individual who gave from their family
foundation, which they used for various charitable efforts.

Shapiro: What do you think that Beauty Without Cruelty accomplished or
has accomplished?

Thurston: Within ten years it became a well-known system of buying
selectively and supporting industries which don’t test on animals or use
animals in any harmful way. Now everybody knows about it. When we first
started, I had a table out on 13th Street and the people who came to the
table thought we were trying to sell a kind of dog shampoo.
\[Laughter\]. Beauty Without Cruelty.

Shapiro: What did you think about the Body Shop?

Thurston: I liked them. I liked them very well. We got along very well.
They gave us a large contribution of money at one point.

Shapiro: Were there any other projects that you want to describe? We’ve
talked about AFAAR. We’ve talked about Beauty Without Cruelty. You have
some involvement in the fur issue, don’t you?

Thurston: Yes. Most of the people who joined me and helped me write are
passionately interested with putting a stop to wearing and buying fur
and trying to gut the fur industry. I think they’ve taken on more than
they realize. Anyway, that’s what they are doing now. I hope I can get
them to spread their interests more, because there are other uses of
animal-based apparel which cause suffering.

Shapiro: You’re not very optimistic about that.

Thurston: There is too much I don’t understand. I have a number of
friends who think it’s an ideal to uphold wearing of fur—an ideal that
they loyally support. I don’t get it.

Shapiro: From what you’re saying, it sounds like you weren’t that
interested in that issue.

Thurston: To the contrary, I am very interested; but I think the fur
wars involve a long and hard battle. Meanwhile, it would be better to
put some energy into things that can be accomplished soon. To see no fur
is a major goal for me and to all thorough animal activists. There has
been a great lessening of wearing fur. We have gotten that far. Then the
fur industry ran lots of ads: “Fur is back.” Fur came back a little and
we are searching for the cause of this slippage.

\[End Tape 2, Side A; Begin Tape 2, Side B\]

Shapiro: You were telling me during the break that you remembered a
story from childhood about animals. Do you want to tell us that?

Thurston: Yes. When I was about five or slightly less, my mother wanted
to visit a farm, mainly to educate me. I said, “Would there be animals
there?” She said, yes, that there would be and, among other animals,
baby lambs. I was very interested. So we went there, but I was
horrified. My mother apparently was not. I was horrified that all the
animals there were used lethally. The first thing I saw was the farmer
woman carrying three or four chickens upside-down by their legs to the
kitchen—live ones. I saw other things like that. For some reason, I
couldn’t get to see the baby lambs, of which there were supposed to be
some, until just the day we left. She brought out some nursing bottles
for them, and they were extremely hungry and nursing those bottles. They
didn’t get to nurse their mothers for some reason, which wasn’t
explained. So I got an impression of horror from that farm rather than
anything else—that grownups were hiding the horrible things they did
from children.

Then another time, again, we visited friends of my parents at the
University of Minnesota in one of the buildings. I had just an
impression—I don’t know how or how it came; my friend with me also, a
child of the same age—that they were doing horrible things to animals
and maybe children in some of those buildings. My whole impression of
the University of Minnesota buildings was that secret, horrible things
were going on. I didn’t know what they were.

Shapiro: Do you remember how old you were then?

Thurston: Four or five. And that grownup people, such as my mother, knew
all about them but they kept them secret from children.

Shapiro: Did you have a sense that your mother was horrified also or no?

Thurston: She loved animals in her own way. She thought she loved
animals. But she said, “Of course, they”—with others being “them”—“you
have to bend your head to, because that is what they are doing.” Society
was doing this.

Shapiro: Did she understand how strong your feelings were about animals?

Thurston: No, I don’t think so.

Shapiro: Did your father understand?

Thurston: I don’t think he understood. He thought I was being
temperamental and cute. If I went on about it, he thought it was a
nuisance.

Shapiro: That your feelings were a nuisance?

Thurston: Yes. I never discussed it with my father because I don’t think
he would have sympathized at all. He was sympathetic on many subjects,
but not on that, because he had no feelings about it within himself
particularly.

Shapiro: What about your brother? Was he sympathetic?

Thurston: He was not born until I was nine. He had some sympathetic
feelings. Then we had a lot of fights because he did what small children
like to do, pull tails and things with the household animals. We were
constantly fighting over that.

Shapiro: You mentioned a dog named Teazle. Do you want to tell us
anymore about that relationship? Was that a special relationship?

Thurston: Yes. I’ll precede that with another dog. When I was again
around five, Dave was run over. He was run over at a time when I had
disobeyed my parents. A friend and I were invited by a German lady to go
and visit her. We said, “We’ll have to ask our mothers if we can go.”
She said, “Now you don’t have to ask your mother, because I’m giving you
permission, and I will give you a lot of candy.” (This was during World
War I against Germany.) We thought that was a great lark to do that, and
so we went home with her. She found the cupboard was bare, but she went
out to buy candy. We were alone in the house. A few minutes later my
mother walked towards the house in a state of fury and told us we were
to come home immediately, we should not have gone there, and she should
not have invited us. She was a German lady who had married a colleague
of my father’s who was of German descent but an American citizen.
Anyway, there was a mix-up over it. At that time when she was coming
over to retrieve me, she hadn’t kept much eye on the dog, who got run
over. I was convinced that it was because I was bad that the dog was
then run over. That was Dave.

Then we got another dog.

Shapiro: You felt guilty?

Thurston: I felt guilty. I felt that because I had been bad, he was run
over.

Shapiro: Did you talk to anybody about that?

Thurston: I talked to my mother, but she didn’t understand.

Shapiro: Do you think you got over that guilt?

Thurston: I don’t know. Then we got another dog, Tony, and Tony bit me
from then on whenever I tried to make friends with him. He had just had
a four-day train trip and I was the first person he saw when his crate
was opened.

Shapiro: This is not Teazle.

Thurston: This was still not Teazle. This was Tony. I tried to welcome
him to the house by giving him food; he thought I was taking food away
from him. He constantly bit me and he never liked me, even though I
tried over years, because I thought I could easily make friends with
animals.

Shapiro: How did you understand your having trouble with him?

Thurston: Because whenever I tried to make friends with him, he bit me.
That went on for his whole life. I don’t know why, but I think it was
when I first tried to make friends with him, he had been shipped four
days across country in a shipping crate, which I realized later was too
small.

Shapiro: He was traumatized.

Thurston: He was in a state—a very bad state—and ready to bite anybody.
That dog was my mother’s dog. Then a few years later, a friend of ours
gave me Teazle. She thought that that would help mend the situation.

Shapiro: How old were you when you got Teazle?

Thurston: I was eight. So I was very, very protective of Teazle. When my
brother came along, he did the usual small child things. He would run
over her with his tricycle, things like that; there was constant
friction. So I was sent to boarding school.

Shapiro: How did you deal with the loss of Teazle? You went to boarding
school without Teazle.

Thurston: I worried about her and talked about her. I wrote our cook to
please watch over Teazle and see that she did not refuse to eat. She
wrote back that she would. Then at the boarding school the principal
said I was not to talk about animals at all, not ever. I had no choice.
I think when I was gone, my brother molested Teazle less because he
didn’t get a rise out of anyone.

Shapiro: Did you see Teazle again or was that the end of Teazle for you?

Thurston: No. She lived on and lived a very long life. My mother—since I
was in boarding schools and in college, my mother more or less took her
over. When she took her over she protected her.

Shapiro: So you didn’t feel you had abandoned her.

Thurston: Well, I did at first, but I had no choice.

Shapiro: In your own mind, how do you relate those early experiences
with animals to your later interest in animals?

Thurston: How do I relate them? Well, I was mainly trying unsuccessfully
to protect them, except in the case of that Tony, in which he became an
enemy because he thought I shut him on that train for four days.

Shapiro: And in your later work you were also trying to protect animals.

Thurston: I don’t know if there was any connection. First that came. But
I didn’t even want the animals who were unfriendly to me—I didn’t want
the animals who were unfriendly to me to be harmed because it physically
hurt them. But when one of them caught distemper, I am ashamed that I
was not very sympathetic.

Shapiro: Let’s go back up to the present again. I asked you a little bit
about your views of some other animal protection organizations.

Thurston: Yes. If you will mention which they are.

Shapiro: I think there are some people that you have had some contact
with, and I’d like to know your impressions of them. What people outside
of your own group in other groups are you closest to?

Thurston: NEAVS.

Shapiro: What people there?

Thurston: Theo Capaldo and \[Margaret\] Peggy Stathos.

Shapiro: Do you want to tell me about those people? Theo Capaldo?

Thurston: I haven’t known her very long. She’s very supportive of what
I’m doing. I like what NEAVS is doing. I think it was very good for
NEAVS to go out and be supportive of other animal protection societies
rather than be rivals, because there is a lot of rivalry. Do you agree
with that?

Shapiro: There is some rivalry and there is some cooperation. But you
were impressed with NEAVS. Peggy Stathos?

Thurston: Yes. I haven’t seen her for several years, except at the
October gathering.

Shapiro: When did you first meet her?

Thurston: She’s a musician, and I like her touch on the piano and
harpsichord.

Shapiro: Do you remember when that first contact was with Peggy Stathos,
how long ago that was?

Thurston: That was several years ago. About two or three years ago I
went with one of our vice presidents and we stayed at her house and
visited her and attended a gathering of animal activists which she
supervised, took charge of.

Shapiro: Can you tell us more about her?

Thurston: No, except that she was very supportive of what we were doing.
I don’t remember anything very much.

Shapiro: Who are other people in the movement that you have had some
relationship with?

Thurston: When I first got into animal protection in this country, Helen
Jones, because she was one of the few—I and several friends looked her
up and tried to get to know her personally. We invited her to lunch in
Washington. Then my friends became a little less interested because they
said they felt that she was too self-centered for our movement; that
when somebody else spoke her eyes showed no interest, that when people
mentioned her, then her eyes lit up.

Shapiro: Who else besides Helen Jones then? Other people that you had
some contact with?

Thurston: Yes. One of my friends (who has died since) was, along with
me, very interested in animal protection. He was the one who said that
her eyes showed differences and, in short, was too self-centered. I
tried to stop myself from being like that myself. I don’t know if I’ve
been successful or not.

Shapiro: Can I mention a couple of people and see if you had any contact
with them? Did you know Henry Spira?

Thurston: I didn’t get along with him at all.

Shapiro: What was your impression of him?

Thurston: Henry Spira was very critical of people who don’t do things
the way he wanted. In the early days, I tried to get along with him. He
would just send letters giving orders: Then there was some issue in
which he ordered his correspondents to do something which I didn’t think
was the right thing to do at all, and I refused. I gave up trying to do
anything with him, so he became quite hostile.

Shapiro: Did you know Christine Stevens? Do you know Christine Stevens?

Thurston: Yes. We get along well.

Shapiro: Tell me about her. When did you first have contact with her?

Thurston: She was criticized for being too permissive to animal users,
because she didn’t object to experimentation if the animals were treated
as well as possible under the circumstances. But I think she probably
saved animals from a lot of suffering just by that, and so I was
sympathetic with her and we were friends.

Shapiro: Did you ever do any work with her?

Thurston: No. We’ve written an occasional supportive letter to one
another. When she was trying to get humane societies to back a
particular thing, she asked for that and I would always do it and vice
versa.

Shapiro: Were you at all involved in the legislation, the Animal Welfare
Act, that she was involved in?

Thurston: Yes. I supported that, even though a lot of animal societies
didn’t support it because it wasn’t complete. But it was what they could
do then, and so I supported it for that reason.

Shapiro: Were you active in the legislation at all or you just gave
support?

Thurston: No, I wasn’t active in it because I wasn’t in Washington. I
wrote letters. When people asked for supportive letters, I wrote them.

Shapiro: How about Ann Cottrell Free? Do you know her?

Thurston: Ann Free? She’s very nice.

Shapiro: Do you have a relationship with her?

Thurston: Yes. Whenever I would go to Washington to do animal work, she
introduced me to people and drove me some of the places where we needed
to go.

Shapiro: Do you have any sense of what her views are on animals?

Thurston: I think they’re not too different from mine.

Shapiro: Are yours similar to Christine Stevens, or do you think you
have some differences?

Thurston: I would not want to be quite so permissive. I would like to
have at least as a goal to stop all of the experimentation on animals—as
a goal, understanding that it was not possible to try to have it sooner.

Shapiro: It’s a long-term goal.

Thurston: Yes.

Shapiro: Other characters or persons that you can remember in the
movement?

Thurston: Oh, quite a lot.

Shapiro: Tom Regan?

Thurston: Yes. I got the English people that we worked with to take an
interest in him. I attended a conference at Yale in the very early days
when he was not very well known, and he spoke knowledgeably about
science. He was the first animal activist I met who understood science
and thus might help reform it. I invited him and Colin Smith and a
colleague of Colin Smith’s all to dinner at the Russian Tea Room. They
arranged for him to be chairman of a big meeting on religion and animals
which NAVS gave, the English NAVS.

Shapiro: Do you remember roughly what time that was, what year that was?

Thurston: That was in the 1970s. I think the first half of the 1970s.
They work together, as far as I know, very closely ever since. They got
along very well, the English people and Tom Regan.

Shapiro: Others? Do you know Gretchen Wyler?

Thurston: Very well.

Shapiro: Tell me about her.

Thurston: We worked here a great deal together when she was in New York.
She was a vice president of Beauty Without Cruelty as well as president
of her shelter. Now there is not as much opportunity to work with her,
but I do. I ask her advice on issues as to what the public would accept
and wouldn’t accept and things of which she knows more than I do. In
fact, I have recently written her for advice.

Shapiro: So you find that she’s good at reading the public.

Thurston: She’s become very active on the west coast.

Shapiro: Do you remember other people in the movement?

Thurston: Tom Regan we worked with because he’s more radical in not
using animals and he understands academic language.

Shapiro: You found him too radical?

Thurston: Some of the public, the real animal lovers, are very
enthusiastic about him, especially because he’s such a good speaker.
Others—they would just think he was fringe.

Shapiro: What about Peter Singer? Do you know him?

Thurston: Yes. I don’t know him very well.

Shapiro: Have you met him?

Thurston: Yes. I tried very hard to interest people when he first came
here and was not known at all. It’s not necessary to try and interest
people now; they’re all very interested.

Shapiro: Did you know Dallas Pratt?

Thurston: Yes. We got along very well with him.

Shapiro: Tell me about him.

Thurston: You knew him because he was—

Shapiro: I didn’t know him.

Thurston: You didn’t know him.

Shapiro: Not personally.

Thurston: He was a very good influence.

Shapiro: Influence on what?

Thurston: Because he understood the people he was trying to reform. He
was a psychologist. He brought people together by showing them the films
that were available in those days. Then the films—he arranged to have
them reviewed, and then the reviews critiqued. I have all his literature
here. Do you remember anyone else?

Shapiro: Everybody I mention, you know, but I can’t think of that many
people. Shirley McGreal?

Thurston: I don’t know her very well. Ann Free—she’s not head of an
organization, is she?

Shapiro: She’s involved with the Albert Schweitzer Center.

Thurston: Yes, that’s it. She gave me an introduction to meet the Center
in Germany. It’s in Alsace-Lorraine in France, which are sometimes part
of Germany.

Shapiro: Who do you think has made the greatest contribution to the
movement, in your opinion?

Thurston: That would be very hard to say, because the contributions are
different.

Shapiro: Name two or three that have made contributions that are very
important.

Thurston: PETA has, because PETA made animal protection a household
expression. I think some of the others have a more balanced view. I
think Tom Regan also has done a lot. And NEAVS, because of the balanced
view. I think those three.

Shapiro: What do you feel your greatest contribution is?

Thurston: I think I got people to take a more balanced view instead of
the extreme one, and also through the concept of alternatives animal
research..

Shapiro: Through the concept of alternatives.

Thurston: We mail out leaflets; people discuss them. I think they
sometimes understand a little more than they would have without.

Shapiro: Any other loose ends that you want to mention?

Thurston: I don’t think of any. Do you?

Shapiro: There was one other thing I wanted to ask you about. We haven’t
talked much about your personal relations. Do you have anything you want
to say about that area?

Thurston: I’m not married, never have been married. On the whole, most
of my relations with animal protection have involved scientists, and
only some become personally involved with us.

Shapiro: How about before that when you were doing music? Did you have
some close relationships then?

Thurston: Oh, yes. None of them lasted more than a few years, and none
were with animal protection people.

Shapiro: Do you find it harder to get along with animal protection
people than other people or easier?

Thurston: I think they’re harder to get along with.

Shapiro: In what way?

Thurston: Likely to be dogmatic.

Shapiro: I think we can wind up here unless you have something else you
want to—is there anything else you want to say?

Thurston: I don’t think so. I think we’ve covered so much.

Shapiro: Good. It’s been a pleasure talking with you.

Thurston: It’s been a pleasure talking with you, too. It’s very nice of
you to have taken the trouble to come up from Washington and stay over
in order to get it really done right.

Shapiro: My pleasure.

\[End of Session\].

\[End of Interview\].

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

INDEX

Academic and education profession 10–13, 16–19

Albert Schweitzer Center 52

American Anti-Vivisection Society (AAVS) 39

American Fund for Alternatives to Animal Research (AFAAR) 30–33, 35,
40–44

animal experimentation and testing 21–22, 28–29, 49–50

alternatives 22–24, 25, 28–29, 33–37, 40–42

animal rights movement/animal protection community 38–40, 48–53

Animal Welfare Act 50

Balls, Michael 24, 38

Bank Street School 10

Barnard College 11

Beauty Without Cruelty 12, 28, 30, 42–44, 51

Body Shop 44

Boulanger, Nadia 7, 11, 12

Burch, Rex L. 23

California Veterinarian \[magazine\] 30

Capaldo, Theo 42, 48

Catholic University 36

children and animals 1, 3, 5–6, 45–46

China 40

Chumakov, Konstantin 33

College of St. Catherine 14

Connecticut 4

New Haven 4

Norwalk 4

Dave \[dog\] 1, 2, 46

Day, Dorothy 20

demonstrations and protests 39–40

dogs 1–2, 5–6, 46–48

Dowding, Lady Muriel 26–28, 30, 42, 43

Dowding, Lord Hugh 26

economics 29

education 10, 36–37

Ekwall, Björn 31, 33, 34, 41, 42

England See Great Britain

ethics and morality 8–9

European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM) 24, 38

Evans, Jon 30, 32

France 7, 11, 12, 52

Fontainebleau 11

Francis, Deborah 37

Free, Ann Cottrell 36, 50, 52

funding/finance 32–33, 40–41, 43–44

fur 44–45

Germany 52

Great Britain 22, 25, 33, 35, 42, 43

London 25

Harvard University 6, 11

Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) 38

Hunter College 18–20

In Defense of Animals (IDA) 39

Italy

Milan 25

Jones, Helen 20–22, 29, 30, 43, 49

Leighton, Joseph 41

Levenbook, Inessa 33, 34

Lord Dowding Fund for Humane Research 34

managing an organization 32–33, 42–43

Manhattan College of Music 28

Manhattanville College 12–15

McGreal, Shirley 52

Minnesota 4, 14–16, 18

Minneapolis 1

Multicenter Evaluation of In Vitro Cytotoxicity (MEIC) 42

music/musicians 7, 11–13, 16–19

Nardone, Roland 33, 36, 40

National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS) \[England\] 25, 26, 30, 32, 33,
51

National Catholic Society for Animal Welfare 20, 21, 26

Netherlands 26

New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS) 39, 48, 53

New York 16

New York City 10, 12, 18, 22, 32, 39, 51

Poughkeepsie 7, 10, 16

Purchase 13

New York University (NYU) 16, 18, 39

Nottingham University 24

Orlans, Barbara 34

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 38, 53

Petricciani, John 30, 31, 33, 35, 36

Poughkeepsie Day School 10

Pratt, Dallas 52

psychological aspects 5, 45–48

public relations/outreach 27–28, 29–30, 44

Reese, Gustav 16–18

Regan, Tom 30, 51, 53

religion

Christianity 6, 14–15, 21

RM Associates 40

Russell, William M. S. 23

science/scientific community 21, 30–31, 33–38, 40–42

Seiling, Elinor 22–26, 30

Sharpe, Robert 33

Singer, Peter 52

Smith, Colin 24–26, 30, 32, 33, 43, 51

Spira, Henry 49

Stathos, Margaret "Peggy" 48, 49

Stevens, Christine 49, 50

Stevens, Georgia 12, 13, 15

Sweden 34

Switzerland 26

Talma, Louise 18

Tchao, Ruy 40

Teazle \[dog\] 5, 6, 46, 47

Thurston, brother 2, 3, 46, 47

Thurston, father 1, 2, 6, 15, 45, 46

Thurston, mother 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 15, 45–47

Tony \[dog\] 47, 48

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 30, 31, 34, 35

United Action for Animals 24

University of Minnesota 1, 4, 45

Vassar College 6, 7, 9, 10

vegetarianism 26–27, 28–29

Washington, DC 21, 31, 35, 36, 49, 50, 54

Wellesley College 11

World War I 46

World War II 12

Wyler, Gretchen 51

Yale University 4, 6, 51

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[1\] Ethel Thurston, The Conductus Collections of ms Wolfenbüttel 1099
(Madison: A-R Editions, \[1980\]).

\[2\] William M. S. Russell and Rex L. Burch, The Principles of Humane
Experimental Technique (London: Methuen, 1959). The three R’s are:
Refinement of procedures to minimize stress or pain to the animals;
Reduce the number of animals used to the minimum that will serve a
useful purpose and achieve a potential scientific benefit that cannot be
obtained by using alternative procedures; Replace animals with cell or
tissue cultures or by mathematical models where possible.

\[3\] A copy of the list is attached.
